#### CHAPTER 5

#### CODES OF PRACTICE

**29 Codes of practice about duties**


(1) OFCOM must prepare a code of practice for providers of regulated services
describing recommended steps for the purposes of compliance with duties set
out in section 9 or 21 (safety duties about illegal content) so far as relating to
terrorism content.


(2) OFCOM must prepare a code of practice for providers of regulated services
describing recommended steps for the purposes of compliance with duties set
out in section 9 or 21 (safety duties about illegal content) so far as relating to
CSEA content.


(3) OFCOM must prepare one or more codes of practice for providers of regulated
services describing recommended steps for the purposes of compliance with
the relevant duties (except to the extent that steps for the purposes of
compliance with such duties are described in a code of practice prepared under
subsection (1) or (2)).


(4) Where a code of practice under this section is in force, OFCOM may—
(a) prepare amendments of the code of practice;
(b) prepare a code of practice under subsection (1), (2) or (3) as a
replacement for a code of practice previously prepared under the
subsection in question;
(c) withdraw the code of practice.


(5) Before preparing a code of practice or amendments under this section, OFCOM
must consult—
(a) the Secretary of State,
(b) persons who appear to OFCOM to represent providers of regulated
services,

#### 5

#### 10

#### 15

#### 20

#### 25

#### 30

#### 35

#### 40



Part 2 — Providers of regulated services: duties of care
Chapter 5 — Codes of practice

#### 26


(c) persons who appear to OFCOM to represent the interests of United
Kingdom users of regulated services,
(d) persons who appear to OFCOM to represent the interests of children
(generally or with particular reference to online safety matters),
(e) persons who appear to OFCOM to represent the interests of persons
who have suffered harm as a result of encountering content online,
(f) persons whom OFCOM consider to have relevant expertise in equality
issues and human rights, in particular—
(i) the right to freedom of expression set out in Article 10 of the
Convention, and
(ii) the right to respect for a person’s private and family life, home
and correspondence set out in Article 8 of the Convention,
(g) persons whom OFCOM consider to have expertise in public health,
science or medicine that is relevant to online safety matters,
(h) persons whom OFCOM consider to have expertise in innovation, or
emerging technology, that is relevant to online safety matters, and
(i) such other persons as OFCOM consider appropriate.


(6) Before preparing a code of practice or amendments to which this subsection
applies, OFCOM must also consult persons whom OFCOM consider to have
expertise in the enforcement of the criminal law and the protection of national
security that is relevant to online safety matters.


(7) Subsection (6) applies to—
(a) a code of practice under subsection (1) and amendments of such a code,
(b) a code of practice under subsection (2) and amendments of such a code,
(c) a code of practice under subsection (3) that describes recommended
steps for the purposes of compliance with duties set out in section 9 or
21 (safety duties about illegal content), and
(d) amendments of a code of practice under subsection (3), if and to the
extent that those amendments relate to steps recommended for the
purposes of compliance with duties set out in section 9 or 21.


(8) Subsections (5) and (6) are subject to section 35 (minor amendments of code of
practice).


(9) In this section “the relevant duties” means—
(a) the Chapter 2 safety duties,
(b) the Chapter 3 safety duties,
(c) the duties set out in section 13 (content of democratic importance),
(d) the duties set out in section 14 (journalistic content), and
(e) the duties set out in sections 15 and 24 (reporting and redress).

**30 Online safety objectives**


(1) OFCOM must ensure that steps described in the codes of practice prepared
under section 29 are compatible with pursuit of the online safety objectives.


(2) The online safety objectives for regulated user-to-user services are—
(a) to design and operate a service in such a way that—
(i) the systems and processes for regulatory compliance and risk
management are effective and proportionate to the size and
nature of the service,
(ii) the systems and processes are appropriate to deal with the
number of users of the service and its user base,
(iii) United Kingdom users (including children) are made aware of,
and can understand, the terms of service,
(iv) there are adequate systems and processes to support United
Kingdom users,
(v) the service provides a higher standard of protection for children
than for adults,
(vi) the different needs of children at different ages are taken into
account,
(vii) there are adequate controls over access to the service by adults,
and
(viii) there are adequate controls over access to, and use of, the
service by children, taking into account use of the service by,
and impact on, children in different age groups; and
(b) to design and assess the service with a view to protecting United
Kingdom users from harm, including with regard to—
(i) algorithms used by the service,
(ii) functionalities of the service, and
(iii) other features relating to the operation of the service.


(3) The online safety objectives for regulated search services are—
(a) to design and operate a service in such a way that—
(i) the systems and processes for regulatory compliance and risk
management are effective and proportionate to the size and
nature of the service,
(ii) the systems and processes are appropriate to deal with the
number of users of the service and its user base,
(iii) United Kingdom users (including children) are made aware of,
and can understand, the publicly available statement referred to
in sections 21 and 22,
(iv) there are adequate systems and processes to support United
Kingdom users,
(v) the service provides a higher standard of protection for children
than for adults, and
(vi) the different needs of children at different ages are taken into
account;
(b) to assess use of the service by, and impact on, children in different age
groups; and
(c) to design and assess the search engine with a view to protecting United
Kingdom users from harm, including with regard to—
(i) algorithms used by the search engine,
(ii) functionalities relating to searches (such as a predictive search
functionality), and
(iii) the indexing, organisation and presentation of search results.


(4) In the case of a regulated user-to-user service that includes a search engine, the
online safety objectives set out in subsection (3) apply in relation to the search
engine (and accordingly references in that subsection to a search service are to
be read as references to the search engine).
(5) The Secretary of State may by regulations amend subsection (2) or (3) so as to
vary the online safety objectives for regulated user-to-user services or
regulated search services.


(6) If regulations are made amending the online safety objectives, OFCOM must,
as soon as reasonably practicable afterwards, consider whether a review of the
codes of practice published under section 34 is required and, if OFCOM
consider that it is required, carry out a review to assess whether any
amendments are needed to reflect the revised objectives.


(7) See section 36(8) and (9) for further provision about the online safety objectives.

**31 Further provision about codes of practice**


(1) In preparing a code of practice or amendments under section 29, OFCOM
must—
(a) consider the appropriateness of provisions of the code of practice to
different kinds and sizes of regulated services and to providers of
differing kinds, sizes and capacities;
(b) have regard to the following principles—
(i) the principle that providers of regulated services must be able
to understand which provisions of the code of practice apply in
relation to a particular service they provide;
(ii) the principle that the steps described in the code of practice
must be sufficiently clear, and at a sufficiently detailed level,
that providers understand what those steps entail in practice;
(iii) the principle that the steps described in the code of practice
must be proportionate and feasible, recognising that steps that
are proportionate or feasible for providers of a certain kind, size
or capacity may not be proportionate or feasible for providers of
a different kind, size or capacity;
(iv) the principle that the steps described in the code of practice that
apply in relation to regulated services of various kinds and sizes
must be proportionate to OFCOM’s assessment (under section
61) of the risk of harm presented by services of that kind or size.


(2) A code of practice under section 29 may—
(a) make different provision with regard to—
(i) regulated user-to-user services, and
(ii) regulated search services;
(b) make different provision with regard to regulated user-to-user services
of different kinds or regulated search services of different kinds; and
(c) otherwise differentiate between regulated services, and between
providers of regulated services, in such manner as OFCOM consider
appropriate.


(3) A code of practice under section 29 may apply in relation to a person who
provides a regulated service from outside the United Kingdom.


(4) Steps described in a code of practice under section 29 may relate only to the
design or operation of a regulated service—
(a) in the United Kingdom, or
(b) as it affects United Kingdom users of the service.

(5) Steps described in a code of practice under section 29 which are recommended
for the purposes of compliance with any of the relevant duties must be
designed in the light of the principles mentioned in subsection (6) and (where
appropriate) incorporate safeguards for the protection of the matters
mentioned in the principles.


(6) The principles are—
(a) the importance of protecting the right of users and (in the case of search
services) interested persons to freedom of expression within the law,
and
(b) the importance of protecting users from unwarranted infringements of
privacy.


(7) In this section “the relevant duties” has the meaning given by section 29(9).

**32 Approval of codes of practice**


(1) OFCOM must submit a code of practice prepared under section 29 to the
Secretary of State.


(2) Unless the Secretary of State intends to give a direction to OFCOM under
section 33(1) in relation to the code of practice, the Secretary of State must, as
soon as reasonably practicable, lay the code of practice before Parliament.


(3) If, within the 40-day period, either House of Parliament resolves not to
approve the code of practice—
(a) OFCOM must not issue the code of practice, and
(b) OFCOM must prepare another version of the code of practice.


(4) If no such resolution is made within that period—
(a) OFCOM must issue the code of practice, and
(b) the code of practice comes into force at the end of the period of 21 days
beginning with the day on which it is issued.


(5) In this section, “the 40-day period” means—
(a) if the code of practice is laid before both Houses of Parliament on the
same day, the period of 40 days beginning with that day, or
(b) if the code of practice is laid before the Houses of Parliament on
different days, the period of 40 days beginning with the later of those
days.


(6) In calculating the 40-day period, no account is to be taken of any period during
which Parliament is dissolved or prorogued or during which both Houses of
Parliament are adjourned for more than 4 days.


(7) This section applies in relation to amendments of a code of practice prepared
under section 29 (see subsection (4)(a) of that section) as it applies in relation to
a code of practice prepared under that section.


(8) This section is subject to section 35 (minor amendments of codes of practice).

**33 Secretary of State’s power of direction**


(1) The Secretary of State may direct OFCOM to modify a code of practice
submitted under section 32(1) where the Secretary of State believes that
modifications are required—

(a) to ensure that the code of practice reflects government policy, or
(b) in the case of a code of practice under section 29(1) or (2), for reasons of
national security or public safety.


(2) A direction given under this section—
(a) may not require OFCOM to include in a code of practice provision
about a particular step recommended to be taken by providers of
regulated services, and
(b) must set out the Secretary of State’s reasons for requiring modifications
(except in a case where the Secretary of State considers that doing so
would be against the interests of national security or against the
interests of relations with the government of a country outside the
United Kingdom).


(3) Where the Secretary of State gives a direction to OFCOM, OFCOM must, as
soon as reasonably practicable—
(a) comply with the direction,
(b) submit to the Secretary of State the code of practice modified in
accordance with the direction,
(c) submit to the Secretary of State a document containing—
(i) (except in a case mentioned in subsection (2)(b)) details of the
direction, and
(ii) details about how the code of practice has been revised in
response to the direction, and
(d) inform the Secretary of State about modifications that OFCOM have
made to the code of practice that are not in response to the direction (if
there are any).


(4) The Secretary of State may give OFCOM one or more further directions
requiring OFCOM to modify the code of practice for the reasons mentioned in
paragraph (a) or (b) of subsection (1), and subsections (2) and (3) apply again
in relation to any such further direction.


(5) When the Secretary of State is satisfied that no further modifications to the code
of practice are required, the Secretary of State must, as soon as reasonably
practicable, lay the modified code of practice before Parliament, together with
any document submitted by OFCOM as mentioned in subsection (3)(c).


(6) Subsections (3) to (6) of section 32 apply in relation to a modified code of
practice laid under subsection (5) as they apply in relation to a code of practice
laid under subsection (2) of that section.


(7) This section applies in relation to amendments of a code of practice submitted
under section 32(1) as it applies in relation to a code of practice submitted
under that provision.

**34 Publication and review of codes of practice**


(1) OFCOM must publish each code of practice issued under section 32(4)(a)
within the period of three days beginning with the day on which it is issued.


(2) Where amendments of a code of practice are issued under that provision,
OFCOM must publish the amended code of practice within the period of three
days beginning with the day on which the amendments are issued.
(3) Where a code of practice is withdrawn, OFCOM must publish a notice to that
effect.


(4) Publication under this section must be in any manner that OFCOM consider
appropriate.


(5) OFCOM must keep under review each code of practice published under this
section.


(6) The Secretary of State may at any time require OFCOM to review a code of
practice prepared under section 29(1) or (2).

**35 Minor amendments of codes of practice**


(1) This section applies if—
(a) OFCOM propose to prepare amendments of a code of practice under
section 29, and
(b) OFCOM consider that the minor nature of the amendments means
that—
(i) consultation is unnecessary, and
(ii) the amendments (once prepared) should not be required to be
laid before Parliament.


(2) OFCOM must notify the Secretary of State of OFCOM’s proposed
amendments.


(3) If the Secretary of State agrees with OFCOM that it is appropriate—
(a) the consultation requirements set out in section 29(5) and (6) do not
apply in relation to the proposed amendments, and
(b) section 32 does not apply to the amendments, once prepared.


(4) If the Secretary of State agrees with OFCOM as mentioned in subsection (3),
OFCOM may prepare and issue the amendments of the code of practice.


(5) Amendments of a code of practice issued under this section come into force at
the end of the period of 21 days beginning with the day on which the
amendments are issued.


(6) Section 34(2) applies in relation to amendments of a code of practice issued
under this section as it applies in relation to amendments of a code of practice
issued under section 32.

**36 Relationship between duties and codes of practice**


(1) A provider of a regulated user-to-user service is to be treated as complying
with a duty set out in section 10 (safety duties for services likely to be accessed
by children), 11 (safety duties protecting adults), 13 (content of democratic
importance), 14 (journalistic content) and 15 (reporting and redress duties) if
the provider takes the steps described in a code of practice which are
recommended for the purposes of compliance with the duty in question (so far
as the steps are relevant to the provider and the service in question).


(2) A provider of a regulated user-to-user service is to be treated as complying
with a duty set out in section 9 (safety duties about illegal content) if—
(a) the provider takes the steps described in a code of practice which are
recommended for the purposes of compliance with the duty in
question (so far as the steps are relevant to the provider and the service
in question), and
(b) OFCOM are satisfied that—
(i) terrorism content is not prevalent, and is not persistently
present, on the service, and
(ii) CSEA content is not prevalent, and is not persistently present,
on the service.


(3) A provider of a regulated search service is to be treated as complying with a
duty set out in section 22 (safety duties for services likely to be accessed by
children) and 24 (reporting and redress duties) if the provider takes the steps
described in a code of practice which are recommended for the purposes of
compliance with the duty in question (so far as the steps are relevant to the
provider and the service in question).


(4) A provider of a regulated search service is to be treated as complying with a
duty set out in section 21 (safety duties about illegal content) if—
(a) the provider takes the steps described in a code of practice which are
recommended for the purposes of compliance with the duty in
question (so far as the steps are relevant to the provider and the service
in question), and
(b) OFCOM are satisfied that—
(i) terrorism content is not prevalent, and is not persistently
present, in search results of the service, and
(ii) CSEA content is not prevalent, and is not persistently present,
in search results of the service.


(5) A provider of a regulated user-to-user service is to be treated as complying
with the duty set out in section 12(2) (duty about freedom of expression and
privacy) if the provider takes such of the steps described in a code of practice
which are recommended for the purposes of compliance with a Chapter 2
safety duty (so far as the steps are relevant to the provider and the service in
question) as incorporate safeguards for—
(a) the protection of users’ right to freedom of expression within the law,
or
(b) the protection of users from unwarranted infringements of privacy.


(6) A provider of a regulated search service is to be treated as complying with the
duty set out in section 23(2) (duty about freedom of expression and privacy) if
the provider takes such of the steps described in a code of practice which are
recommended for the purposes of compliance with a Chapter 3 safety duty (so
far as the steps are relevant to the provider and the service in question) as
incorporate safeguards for—
(a) the protection of the rights of users and interested persons to freedom
of expression within the law, or
(b) the protection of users from unwarranted infringements of privacy.


(7) A failure by a provider of a regulated service to act in accordance with a
provision of a code of practice does not of itself make the provider liable to
legal proceedings in a court or tribunal.


(8) A provider of a regulated service who seeks to comply with a relevant duty by
acting otherwise than by taking a step described in a code of practice which is
recommended for the purposes of compliance with the duty must have regard
to the following—

(a) the online safety objectives (so far as they are relevant to the service and
the duty in question), and
(b) the importance of the following (where relevant)—
(i) protecting the right of users and (in the case of search services)
interested persons to freedom of expression within the law, and
(ii) protecting users from unwarranted infringements of privacy.


(9) When assessing whether a provider of a regulated service is compliant with a
relevant duty where the provider has acted otherwise than by taking a step
described in a code of practice which is recommended for the purposes of
compliance with the duty, OFCOM must consider the extent to which the
alternative steps taken by the provider—
(a) achieve the online safety objectives (so far as they are relevant to the
service and the duty in question), and
(b) (where appropriate) incorporate safeguards for the protection of the
matters mentioned in subsection (8)(b).


(10) In subsections (3), (4) and (6), references to a provider of a regulated search
service include references to a provider of a regulated user-to-user service that
includes a search engine (see section 5(6)).


(11) In this section—
“code of practice” means a code of practice published under section 34;
“online safety objectives” means the objectives set out in section 30(2) or
(3) (as the case may be), as amended from time to time;
“relevant duties” means—
(a) the Chapter 2 safety duties,
(b) the Chapter 3 safety duties,
(c) the duties set out in section 13 (content of democratic
importance),
(d) the duties set out in section 14 (journalistic content), and
(e) the duties set out in sections 15 and 24 (reporting and redress).

**37 Effect of codes of practice**


(1) A code of practice is admissible in evidence in legal proceedings.


(2) In any proceedings in a court or tribunal, the court or tribunal must take into
account a provision of a code of practice in determining a question arising in
the proceedings if—
(a) the question relates to a time when the provision was in force, and
(b) the provision appears to the court or tribunal to be relevant to the
question.


(3) OFCOM must take into account a provision of a code of practice in
determining a question arising in connection with their exercise of any relevant
function if—
(a) the question relates to a time when the provision was in force, and
(b) the provision appears to OFCOM to be relevant to the question.


(4) In this section—
“code of practice” means a code of practice published under section 34;
“relevant functions” means OFCOM’s functions under—
(a) Chapter 4 of Part 4 (use of technology),
(b) Chapter 5 of Part 4 (information),
(c) Chapter 6 of Part 4 (enforcement), and
(d) Chapter 2 of Part 5 (super-complaints).

**38 Duties and the first codes of practice**


(1) A duty mentioned in subsection (2) applies to providers of regulated services
from the day on which a code of practice prepared under section 29(3) that is
the first code of practice relating to that duty comes into force.


(2) The duties referred to in subsection (1) are—
(a) the Chapter 2 safety duties,
(b) the Chapter 3 safety duties,
(c) the duties set out in section 13 (content of democratic importance),
(d) the duties set out in section 14 (journalistic content), and
(e) the duties set out in sections 15 and 24 (reporting and redress).


(3) For the purposes of subsection (1) a code of practice is the first code of practice
relating to a duty if—
(a) it describes recommended steps for the purposes of compliance with
that duty, and
(b) it is the first code of practice prepared under section 29(3) that describes
steps for those purposes.


(4) The duties set out in sections 9 and 21 (safety duties about illegal content), so
far as relating to terrorism content, apply to providers of regulated services
from the day on which the first code of practice prepared under section 29(1)
comes into force.


(5) The duties set out in sections 9 and 21, so far as relating to CSEA content, apply
to providers of regulated services from the day on which the first code of
practice prepared under section 29(2) comes into force.


(6) In the case of the duties set out in sections 9 and 21, subsection (1) is subject to
subsections (4) and (5).


(7) In relation to the provider of a particular regulated service, references in this
section to duties applying to providers of regulated services are to such duties
as apply in relation to that service in accordance with provision made by
sections 5 and 17.

#### EXPLANATORY NOTES FOR THIS SECTION

Chapter 5: Codes of practice

Clause 29: Codes of practice about duties

OFCOM is required to produce specific codes of practice in relation to the
illegal content duties (set out in clauses 9 and 21) covering terrorist content
(subsection (1)) and child sexual exploitation and abuse content (subsection (2)).
Subsection (3) requires OFCOM to prepare one or more codes of practice in
relation to the relevant safety duties beyond those set out in subsections (1) and (2).
How these codes should be structured and organised will be a matter for OFCOM to
decide as appropriate. The codes of practice will set out the recommended steps that
service providers can take to comply with the following relevant duties (see
subsection (9)):
a. the safety duties for user-to-user services and search services;
These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)
b. the duties about democratic importance;
c. the duties about journalistic content; and
d. the duties about user reporting and redress.
To ensure the codes of practice stay up to date, subsection (4) allows
OFCOM to prepare amendments and replacements to the codes of practice or to
withdraw a code of practice.
When preparing codes of practice or amendments to them, subsection (5)
sets out the parties whom OFCOM must consult. OFCOM must also consult those
with expertise in national security or the enforcement of criminal law which is relevant
to online safety matters dealing with illegal content (subsections (6) and (7)).
Subsection (8) sets out that the consultation requirements in subsections (5)
and (6) are subject to exceptions where minor amendments are made to the codes of
practice (as set out in clause 35).
Clause 30: Online safety objectives

Subsection (1) requires OFCOM to ensure that its codes of practice are
compatible with the online safety objectives.
Subsection (2) sets out the objectives for user-to-user services and
subsection (3) does the same for search services. For both types of services, the
objectives set out that services are required to put in place effective and
proportionate systems and processes for regulatory compliance and risk
management. The objectives also set out that the functions and features of regulated
services must be designed and operated to protect UK users from harm.
Subsection (4) makes provision for user-to-user services which include
search services, providing that the objectives for search services apply to the search
aspect of the user-to-user service.
Subsection (5) gives the Secretary of State a power to amend subsection (2)
or (3) so as to vary the online safety objectives for regulated user-to-user services or
regulated search services, by regulations. Should such amendments be made,
subsection (6) obliges OFCOM, as soon as reasonably practicable, to consider
whether a review of the codes of practice is required, and if any subsequent changes
to the codes are needed following a review. Regulations made under this power are
subject to the affirmative regulation procedure.
Clause 36(7) and (8) make further provisions about the role of the online
safety objectives in relation to a service provider’s compliance with the relevant
duties. Providers who wish to comply with the duties in a way other than the steps set
out in the codes of practice must have regard to the online safety objectives. On the
issue of whether alternative steps taken by a provider are compliant, OFCOM is
under a duty to consider the extent to which the alternative steps taken by the
provider achieve the online safety objectives (so far as they are relevant to the
service and the duty in question).
These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)
Clause 31: Further provision about codes of practice

Subsection (1)(a) requires OFCOM to consider how appropriate the steps
within codes of practice are for the different kinds and sizes of regulated services and
to different kinds, sizes and capacities of providers. Paragraph (b) then sets out
various principles that OFCOM must follow when preparing a code of practice.
Subsection (2) allows codes of practice to make provisions that are different
for user-to-user and search service providers, and to make different provisions for
different types of user-to-user providers. It also allows OFCOM to differentiate
between regulated services and between providers, as appropriate.
Subsection (3) provides that codes of practice can apply to providers based
outside of the United Kingdom.
Subsection (4) provides that steps set out in a code of practice may only
relate to the design or operation of regulated services as they affect users and others
in the United Kingdom. This means that OFCOM could not set out steps which relate
to the design or operation of services which do not affect UK users.
Steps within the codes of practice must be designed with the importance of
users’ rights to free expression and privacy in mind, and incorporate safeguards for
these rights, where appropriate: see subsections (5) and (6).
Clause 32: Approval of codes of practice

The next three clauses set out the procedural requirements for approval and
publication of the codes of practice.
Subsections (1) and (2) set out that OFCOM must submit a code of practice
to the Secretary of State, and provided the Secretary of State does not intend to
issue a direction to OFCOM (see clause 33), the Secretary of State must lay the
code before Parliament.
Subsection (3) provides that, once the code of practice has been laid before
Parliament, Parliament has 40 days to resolve not to approve it. If Parliament
resolves not to approve the code of practice, OFCOM must not issue the code and
must prepare another version of it.
Subsection (4) provides that if Parliament does not make such a resolution,
OFCOM must issue the code of practice and it will come into force after 21 days
(beginning on the day on which it is issued).
Subsection (5) defines “the 40-day period” in which Parliament may resolve
not to approve the code or practice. This period is defined as starting when the code
has been placed before both Houses of Parliament. Subsection (6) further specifies
that in calculating this period, days when Parliament is dissolved or prorogued or
both Houses are adjourned for more than 4 days should not be taken into account.
Subsection (7) provides that this clause applies to amendments to a code of
practice prepared under clause 29. Subsection (8) provides that this clause is subject
These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)
to clause 35, which sets out the process for making minor amendments to codes of
practice.
Clause 33: Secretary of State’s power of direction

Subsection (1) confers a power on the Secretary of State to direct OFCOM to
modify a code of practice submitted to the Secretary of State under clause 32(1).
This subsection further specifies that the Secretary of State may use this power if
they believe that modifications are required to reflect government policy; or, in
respect of the child sexual exploitation and abuse and terrorism codes only, for
reasons of national security or public safety.
Subsection (2)(a) qualifies this power of the Secretary of State by providing
that a direction made under this clause cannot require OFCOM to include a particular
step recommended to be taken by providers of regulated services in a code of
practice. Subsection (2)(b) further qualifies this power by providing that the Secretary
of State must give reasons for requiring modifications, except where setting out those
reasons would be against the interests of national security or the UK’s relations with
the government of another country.
Subsection (3) provides that OFCOM must as soon as reasonably practicable
comply with a direction made under this clause and sets out the steps that OFCOM
must take when sending the modified code back to the Secretary of State. OFCOM
would be required to submit a document to the Secretary of State containing details
of the direction and changes that have been made to the code of practice as a result
of the direction. OFCOM must also inform the Secretary of State of any modifications
that have been made that are not in response to a direction.
Subsection (4) provides that the Secretary of State may make further
directions. Any further directions must also be issued for one of the reasons set out in
subsection (1) and the requirements in subsections (2) and (3) will apply.
Under subsection (5), once the Secretary of State is content that no further
modifications are necessary, they must as soon as reasonably practicable lay the
revised code of practice before Parliament along with any document submitted by
OFCOM that details what changes have been made to the code of practice, as
mentioned in subsection (3)(c).
Subsection (6) provides that the negative resolution procedure set out in
subsections (3) to (6) of clause 32 also applies in relation to modified codes of
practice that have been laid before Parliament in accordance with subsection (5).
Subsection (7) provides that the process set out in this clause also applies to
amendments to a code of practice submitted to the Secretary of State under clause
Clause 34: Publication and review of codes of practice

This clause sets out what OFCOM must do once a code is ready for
publication. Subsection (1) provides that OFCOM must publish a code of practice
issued under clause 32 within 3 days of it being issued.
These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)
Subsection (2) provides that where amendments of a code of practice have
been issued, OFCOM must publish the amended code within 3 days beginning with
the day on which the amendments are issued.
Subsection (3) applies when a code of practice has been withdrawn, and
requires OFCOM to publish a notice setting out that the code has been withdrawn.
Subsection (4) provides that publication of a code of practice under this
clause must be in any manner that OFCOM considers appropriate.
Subsection (5) provides that OFCOM must keep each code of practice
published under this clause under review, and subsection (6) provides that the
Secretary of State may require a review by OFCOM of either the terrorism or the
child sexual exploitation and abuse (CSEA) code of practice at any time under
section 29(1) or (2), and if any amendments are required this will be subject to the
process for amendments as provided in clause 29.
Clause 35: Minor amendments of codes of practice

This clause allows OFCOM to make minor amendments to the codes of
practice (for example to reflect the changes of the name of a relevant organisation)
without needing to comply with the requirements for consultation and parliamentary
scrutiny. This flexibility should allow the codes to remain up-to-date.
Subsection (1) explains that this clause applies when OFCOM proposes
amendments to a code of practice and OFCOM considers that the minor nature of
the amendments means that consultation is unnecessary and the amendments
should not be required to be laid before Parliament.
Subsection (2) provides that OFCOM must notify the Secretary of State of
these proposed amendments. Subsections (3) provides that, if the Secretary of State
agrees that it is appropriate, the amendments may be made and issued without
complying with the requirements of clause 29(5) and (6) or clause 32. This means
that OFCOM does not have to consult on the proposed changes and the amended
codes do not need to be laid before Parliament.
Subsection (4) provides that if the Secretary of State agrees with OFCOM
that the changes are minor and do not require consultation or to be laid before
Parliament, OFCOM may prepare and issue the amendments of the code of practice.
Subsection (5) provides that amendments issued under this clause come into
force at the end of 21 days, beginning with the day on which the amendments are
issued.
Subsection (6) provides that amendments of a code of practice issued under
this clause must be published within three days of issue.
Clause 36: Relationship between duties and codes of practice

This clause sets out how providers can comply with their relevant duties
under this Bill.
These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)

Subsection (1) provides that a provider of a regulated user-to-user service will
be treated as complying with their safety duties for protecting children and adults,
reporting and redress duties, and duties related to journalistic content and democratic
content if it takes the steps set out in the relevant codes of practice which are
recommended for compliance with the duty in question.
Subsection (2) provides that, in relation to the safety duties for illegal content,
a provider of a regulated user-to-user service will be treated as having complied with
them if it has taken the recommended steps and OFCOM is also satisfied that
terrorist content and CSEA content are not prevalent, and are not persistently
present, on its services.
Subsection (3) provides that a provider of a regulated search service is to be
treated as complying with its safety duties in relation to children and reporting and
redress duties if the provider takes the relevant steps described in a code of practice
which are recommended for the purposes of compliance with the duty in question.
Subsection (4) provides that a provider of a regulated search service is to be
treated as compliant with the safety duties about illegal content if it takes the relevant
steps described in the codes of practice that are recommended for the purposes of
compliance with the duty in question. In addition, OFCOM must be satisfied that
terrorism and CSEA content is not prevalent, and is not persistently present, in the
search results of the search service.
Subsection (5) specifies when a provider of a regulated user-to-user service
is to be treated as complying with the duty set out in clause 12(2) (which is to have
regard to the importance of freedom of expression and privacy when implementing
safety policies and procedures). A provider will be treated as complying with this duty
if they take steps described in a code of practice that are recommended for
compliance with their safety duties which incorporate safeguards for the protection of
users’ rights to freedom of expression or the protection of users from unwarranted
infringements of privacy.
Subsection (6) specifies when a provider of a regulated search service is to
be treated as complying with the duty set out in clause 23(2) (which is a duty to have
regard to the importance of freedom of expression and privacy when deciding on and
implementing safety policies and procedure). A provider will be treated as complying
with this duty if they take steps described in a code of practice that are recommended
for compliance with their safety duties which incorporate safeguards for the
protection of the rights of users and interested persons to freedom of expression or
the protection of users from unwarranted infringements of privacy.
Subsection (7) provides that non-compliance with a provision in a code of
practice does not by itself make the provider liable to legal proceedings in a court or
a tribunal.
Subsection (8) provides that a provider of a regulated service who seeks to
comply with a relevant duty by acting otherwise than by taking a step described in a
code of practice must have regard to the following:
These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)
a. The online safety objectives (in clause 30) where these are relevant to the
service and duty in question; and
b. Where relevant, the importance of protecting the rights of users (and, for
search services, interested persons) to freedom of expression and from
unwarranted infringements of privacy.
Subsection (9) provides that, when assessing whether a provider of a
regulated service is compliant with a relevant duty where they have acted otherwise
than by taking a step described in a code of practice, OFCOM must consider whether
the alternative steps taken by the provider:
a. Achieve the online safety objectives (in clause 30) so far as they are relevant
to the service and duty in question: and
b. Where appropriate, incorporate appropriate safeguards protecting the rights
of users to freedom of expression and from unwarranted infringements of
privacy.
Subsection (10) provides that in subsections (3), (4) and (6), references to a
provider of a regulated search service also include a provider of a regulated user-to-
user service that includes a search engine.
Subsection (11) defines various terms used in this clause, which are self
explanatory.
Clause 37: Effect of codes of practice

Subsection (1) provides that codes of practice can be used as evidence in
legal proceedings.
Subsection (2) provides that a court or tribunal must take into account a
provision of a code of practice, when determining a question that arises during legal
proceedings if (i) the question relates to a time when the provision was in force and,
(ii) the provision appears to the court of tribunal be relevant to the question.
Subsection (3) requires OFCOM to take into account a provision of a code of
practice, when determining a question which arises in connection with their exercise
of any relevant function (defined in subsection (4)) if (i) the question relates to a time
when the provision was in force and (ii) the provision appears to OFCOM to be
relevant to the question.
Subsection (4) is self-explanatory.
Clause 38: Duties and the first codes of practice

Subsection (1) provides that the duties identified in subsection (2) apply to
providers of regulated services from the day on which the first code of practice
relating to each duty comes into force.
Subsection (3) defines the criteria for when a code of practice is the first
relating to a duty. These are:
These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)
a. It sets out the recommended steps for complying with that duty; and
b. It is the first code of practice that defines the steps for those purposes.
Subsections (4) and (5) make specific provision for the relevant duties in
relation to illegal content (as they apply to terrorism and CSEA. These duties apply
when the first codes on terrorism and CSEA come into force. Subsection (6) modifies
subsection (1) of this clause accordingly.
Subsection (7) makes clear that for particular providers of regulated services
the provisions of this clause only concern the duties which apply to them (as
specified in clause 5 for providers of user-to-user services, and in clause 17 for
providers of search services). So for example, the duty to protect content of
democratic importance will apply only to providers of Category 1 services when the
relevant code of practice comes into force.

#### DELEGATED POWERS MEMORANDUM

CHAPTER 5: CODES OF PRACTICE
This memorandum first considers the general duties to prepare codes of practice
under clause 29(3) and (4) and then sets out in the sections below the powers
relating to specific codes of practice on terrorism (clause 29(1)) and child sexual
exploitation and abuse (clause 29(2)).
Clause 29(3) and (4): Codes of practice about duties

Power conferred on: OFCOM and Secretary of State
Power exercised by: Code of practice
Parliamentary procedure: Negative

Context and purpose

This clause places a duty on OFCOM to prepare one or more codes of practice
describing recommended steps for providers of regulated services in complying with
their safety duties under Part 2, Chapters 2 and 3 of the Bill (except as those duties
relate to terrorism content or child sexual exploitation and abuse content):
○ All in-scope providers will have duties to protect users from illegal content,
to put in place user reporting and redress systems and to review compliance
and keep records of any compliance steps taken;
○ Providers whose services are likely to be accessed by children will have
additional duties to protect children’s online safety; and
○ Providers of Category 1 user-to-user services will have additional duties to
protect adults’ online safety for content that is legal but gives rise to a risk of
harm and in relation to content of democratic importance and journalistic
content.
Clause 36(3) provides that a provider of regulated services will be treated as
complying with its safety duties under the Bill if it acts in accordance with every
provision of the code of practice which applies to the duty in question. A provider of a
regulated service can comply with a safety duty by taking alternative measures that
are capable of effectively delivering as good an outcome, or a better one, than would
be achieved by taking the steps set out in the codes of practice. The provider must
have regard to the online safety objectives in clause 30 (see clause 36(8)) and
OFCOM must also have regard to these objectives when assessing compliance
(clause 30(1)).
Where a code is in force, OFCOM may prepare amendments to the code or a
replacement code (see subsection (4)). Before preparing a code or amendment,
OFCOM must consult the persons listed in subsections (5) and (6)).
The Bill will set out a number of requirements for the codes of practice. OFCOM must
ensure that the steps set out in the codes of practice are compatible with the online
safety objectives set out in clause 30. Further, clause 31 will require the codes of
practice to address protecting freedom of expression and the right to privacy. That
clause also requires OFCOM, in drawing up codes of practice, to cater for the variety
of service providers to be regulated and to have regard to the principles that the
contents must be clear, understandable, proportionate, including to OFCOM’s risk
assessment.
Justification for the powers

The codes of practice will focus on the systems and processes that in-scope
providers need to put in place to uphold their regulatory responsibilities. In many
cases the regulator will be defining these systems and processes for the first time in
the codes of practice, rather than drawing on established definitions and precedents
from other regulatory regimes.
The codes of practice will require extensive consultation, including significant
evidence and technical input to ensure that they are effective and proportionate. It is
considered appropriate that the power to draft each code is delegated to OFCOM as
this will ensure that the measures set out are based on the up-to-date evidence and
expertise the regulator will have about the sector, the risk of harms occurring and the
most effective way to mitigate them. This power will also give OFCOM time to consult
on and develop the codes of practice with key stakeholders and experts and provide
the flexibility and future-proofing that is essential to regulation of the safety of this
sector.
OFCOM will consult with relevant parties during the drafting of the codes of practice
before sending the final draft to the Secretary of State (clause 32). Ministers will have
the power to reject a draft code and to direct the regulator to make modifications for
reasons relating to government policy (or national security and public safety in
relation to the child sexual exploitation and abuse and terrorism codes) (clause 33).
The completed codes will be laid in Parliament under the negative procedure, which
means that the codes of practice will come into force on the day they are signed, and
will remain in force unless a motion to reject them is agreed by either house within 40
sitting days.
This power does not specify what codes can be published, either by subject-matter or
number. This allows OFCOM to decide how best to structure its codes of practice to
help companies to fulfil their duties of care without imposing unnecessary burdens. It
will also enable OFCOM to revise codes of practice or produce new ones when
needed to respond to changes in the regulated sector.
Justification for the procedure

By virtue of clause 32, the codes of practice made under clause 29 are subject to the
negative procedure.
It is considered that the negative procedure provides an appropriate level of
parliamentary scrutiny for the codes of practice. This is because of the clear
parameters established in primary legislation and the operational and technical nature
of the content, alongside the extensive consultation process.
The negative procedure also enables the codes of practice to be published and
brought into force quickly. This will keep the regime up to date and ensure that
OFCOM has sufficient powers to tackle illegal harms as they develop.^3
(^3) There is recent precedent for utilising the negative procedure: section 125 of the Data Protection Act 2018
stipulates that codes of practice related to data sharing, direct marketing, data protection and journalism as well
as the Age-Appropriate Design Code are subject to the negative procedure.

Clause 29(1): Codes of practice about duties (terrorism content)

Power conferred on: OFCOM
Power exercised by: Code of practice
Parliamentary procedure: Negative

Context and purpose

Preventing the spread of terrorism content online is central to the Online Safety
framework. Alongside the full government response to the Online Harms White Paper,
the government published the Interim Code of Practice on Terrorist Content and
Activity Online, setting out the government’s expectations of what companies should
be doing to address use of the internet for terrorism. This aimed to provide clarity to
companies prior to the establishment of the regulatory framework and demonstrated
the government’s commitment to tackling terrorism content online.
As set out above, one of OFCOM’s main functions will be to publish codes of practice
setting out the steps companies can take to comply with the duty of care. Platforms
must comply with the codes, or put in place and record an alternative approach
capable of effectively delivering the same (or higher) standards to those set out in the
codes.
As set out throughout this document, the online environment can change quickly –
with changing patterns of user behaviour, platform use, functionality of platforms and
evolving threats. In this context, the ways in which terrorism content is accessed,
used and distributed online can change rapidly, making it essential that the framework
is agile and responsive. As set out above, using codes of practice (as opposed to
primary legislation) will enable the framework and guidance to companies to adapt
more quickly to new harms and technologies and to support innovation.
Under clause 29(1), OFCOM must prepare a code of practice containing guidance to
assist providers of regulated services in complying with their duties under clauses 9 or
21 as relating to terrorism content. Under clause 33(1) ministers will have the power
to make directions to the regulator regarding the codes of practice on child sexual
exploitation and abuse and terrorism in relation to reasons of national security or
public safety as well as to ensure that the code reflects government policy.
Justification for the power

The codes of practice will focus on systems, processes and governance that in-scope
companies need to put in place to uphold their regulatory responsibilities. They will
require extensive consultation to draft, a process which will need significant technical
input to ensure that they are effective and proportionate. It is considered that the
power to draft each code must be delegated so that OFCOM has time to consult on
and develop its codes of practice.
Delegating this power also enables the drafting of future codes, ensuring that the
framework can adapt to the emergence of new technologies, changing online
behaviour and evolving harms.
The Bill will set out a number of requirements for the codes of practice. OFCOM must
ensure that the steps set out in the codes of practice are compatible with the online
safety objectives set out in clause 30. OFCOM will consult with relevant parties during
the drafting of the codes before sending the final draft to the Secretary of State
(clause 32). Ministers will have the power to reject a draft code and to require the
regulator to make modifications for reasons relating to government policy, national
security or public safety (clause 33).
Under clause 34(6), the Secretary of State will be able to require the regulator to
review the codes of practice on terrorism content. This mechanism is intended to
ensure that the codes can respond to changing circumstances, evolving threats and
technology.
Parliament will also have the opportunity to debate and vote on the online safety
objectives during passage of primary legislation and the completed codes will be laid
in Parliament.
Justification for the procedure

By virtue of clause 32, the codes of practice made under clause 29 are subject to the
negative procedure. The negative procedure provides an appropriate level of
parliamentary scrutiny for regulations made under this power because there is an
extensive consultation process prior to the issuing and enforcement of the codes.
The negative procedure also enables codes of practice to be published and brought
into force quickly following the consultation procedure. This will keep the regime up to
date and ensure that OFCOM has sufficient powers to tackle these illegal harms as
they develop.
Clause 29(2): Codes of practice about duties (child sexual exploitation and abuse
content)

Power conferred on: OFCOM
Power exercised by: Code of practice
Parliamentary procedure: Negative

Context and purpose

Preventing online child sexual exploitation and abuse is central to the Online Safety
framework. That is why, alongside the full government response to the Online Harms
White Paper, the government published the Interim Code of Practice on Online Child
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, setting out the government’s expectations of what
companies should be doing to address this illegal content and activity online. This
provided clarity to companies prior to the establishment of the regulatory framework
and demonstrated the government’s commitment to tackling child sexual exploitation
and abuse content online.
When the framework is in force, one of OFCOM’s main functions will be to publish
codes of practice setting out the steps companies can take to comply with the duties
of care. Platforms must comply with the codes, or put in place an alternative approach
capable of effectively delivering the same (or higher) standards to those set out in the
codes.
This power is similar to that provided by clause 29(1). Under clause 30(1), OFCOM
must ensure that the steps set out in the codes of practice are compatible with a
series of online safety objectives set out in that clause, so far as relating to child
sexual exploitation and abuse content.
Justification for the power

Protecting children is central to online safety framework. Many forms of child sexual
exploitation and abuse involve online technology and the framework aims to ensure
that illegal child sexual exploitation and abuse content is identified, minimised and
removed.
Whilst we anticipate that the regulator issued codes of practice will be infrequently
updated, new technologies, trends and offender behaviours may necessitate changes
to the child sexual exploitation and abuse code of practice. Similarly, child sexual
exploitation and abuse content often migrates across services, making agility
essential in adapting to changing patterns of criminal behaviour. Amendments to the
codes of practice will ensure that the framework is futureproofed and can remain up
to date.
The safeguards and extent of this power are the same as that for clause 29(1). The
child sexual exploitation and abuse code of practice will focus on systems, processes
and governance that in-scope companies need to put in place to uphold their
regulatory responsibilities. It will require extensive consultation to draft, a process
which will need significant technical input to ensure that they are effective and
proportionate.
OFCOM must ensure that the steps set out in the codes of practice are compatible
with the online safety objectives set out in clause 30. OFCOM will consult with
relevant parties during the drafting of the codes before sending the final draft to the
Secretary of State (clause 32). Ministers will have the power to reject a draft code and
require the regulator to make modifications for reasons relating to government policy,
national security or public safety (clause 33).
Under clause 34(6) the Secretary of State will be able to require the regulator to
review the codes of practice on child sexual exploitation and abuse. This mechanism
is intended to ensure that the codes can respond to changing circumstances, evolving
threats and technology.
The completed codes will be laid in Parliament.
Justification for the procedure

The justification for the procedure chosen is the same as that for clause 29(1). As
noted in relation to clause 29(1), this choice of procedure is assessed to be
appropriate due to the extensive consultation process.
Clause 30(5): Online safety objectives

Power conferred on: Secretary of State
Power exercised by: Regulations
Parliamentary procedure: Affirmative

Context and purpose

Under clause 30(1) OFCOM must ensure that steps described in the codes of
practice prepared under clause 29 are compatible with pursuit of the online safety
objectives. Subsection (2) prescribes the online safety objectives for user-to-user
services and subsection (3) prescribes the online safety objectives for search
services.
The online safety objectives include designing and operating a service in such a way
that its systems for regulatory compliance and risk management are proportionate
and effective to the size and nature of the service, and appropriate to deal with the
number of its users, that users are made aware and understand the terms of service,
that there are adequate systems to support users, and that there is a higher standard
of protection for children. Clause 30(5) provides that the Secretary of State can by
regulations amend the online safety objectives for both user-to-user and search
services, and this is therefore a Henry VIII power.
Justification for the power

This section provides continued executive oversight of the online safety objectives,
and means that the regime can respond to future technological changes, and can
provide flexibility as new policy priorities emerge.
If regulations are made amending the online safety objectives, OFCOM must, as soon
as reasonably practicable afterwards, consider whether a review of the codes of
practice is required and, if OFCOM consider that it is required, carry out a review to
assess whether any amendments are needed to reflect the revised objectives
subsection (6)).
Justification for the procedure

By virtue of clause 132(4)(b) regulations made under this provision are subject to the
affirmative procedure.
The affirmative procedure is considered appropriate as changes to the online safety
objectives will affect the regulatory framework, principally through the possible need
to review the codes of practice. It is therefore important that Parliament has the
opportunity to debate any changes.
Clause 33(1): Secretary of State’s power of direction

Power conferred on: Secretary of State
Power exercised by: Secretary of State direction power
Parliamentary procedure: None

Context and purpose

Clause 33(1) allows the Secretary of State to direct OFCOM to make specified
modifications to a code of practice that has been submitted to the Secretary of State
for approval under clause 32(1). The Secretary of State can exercise this power
where they believe that the modifications are required to ensure that the code reflects
government policy, or in the case of a code relating to terrorism or child sexual
exploitation and abuse, for reasons of national security and public safety.
Where the Secretary of State gives a direction to OFCOM, OFCOM must comply with
the direction, and submit to the Secretary of State the code modified in accordance
with the direction. The Secretary of State may give OFCOM one or more further
directions requiring OFCOM to make specified modifications to the code.
When the Secretary of State is satisfied that no further modifications to the code are
required, under subsection (5) the Secretary of State must lay the modified code
before Parliament, together with a document containing details about directions given
under this section and how the code has been revised in response to them. As
referenced in subsection (2)(b), there are exemptions to the requirement to publish in
relation to national security or where it would be against the interests of relations with
the government of a country outside the United Kingdom.
Justification for the power

This power ensures that codes of practice are in line with government policy and that
the Secretary of State can take steps to ensure that there are sufficient provisions to
prevent child sexual exploitation and abuse and terrorism content online. Delegating
this power is essential because it allows the Secretary of State to respond to changes
to the codes of practice under clause 29(1) and ensure that the codes reflect
government policy and national security or public safety concerns.
A direction given under this section must set out the Secretary of State’s reasons for
requiring the modifications. As noted above, when the Secretary of State is satisfied
that no further modifications are necessary, they must lay the modified code before
Parliament, together with a document containing details about directions given under
this section and how the code has been revised in response to them. This provides
Parliament with full oversight of the revision process.
Justification for the procedure

This is a power of direction for the Secretary of State. All draft codes of practice which
are altered as a result of a direction being made under this power will be laid before
Parliament and as such be subject to parliamentary scrutiny. Imposing further
procedural constraints at the direction-making stage would therefore serve little
purpose while delaying the taking of swift and effective action in response to national
security or public safety concerns.
