PART 7


GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS


Providers of regulated services

**116 “Provider” of user-to-user service or search service**


(1) This section applies to determine who is the “provider” of a user-to-user
service or a search service for the purposes of this Act.


(2) The provider of a user-to-user service is to be treated as being the entity that
has control over who can use the service (and that entity alone).


(3) Where no entity has control over who can use a user-to-user service, but an
individual or individuals have control over who can use it, the provider of the
service is to be treated as being that individual or those individuals.


(4) A person who provides an access facility in relation to a user-to-user service,
within the meaning of section 93, is not to be regarded as a person who has
control over who can use that service for the purposes of subsections (2) and
(3).


(5) The provider of a search service is to be treated as being the entity that has
control over the operations of the search engine (and that entity alone).


(6) Where no entity has control over the operations of the search engine, but an
individual or individuals have control over those operations, the provider of
the search service is to be treated as being that individual or those individuals.


(7) Where a user-to-user service or a search service is generated by a machine, the
entity that controls the machine (and that entity alone) is to be treated as being
the provider of the service.


(8) Where no entity controls the machine, but an individual or individuals control
it, the provider of the service is to be treated as being that individual or those
individuals.


(9) In this section “operations of the search engine” means operations which—
(a) enable users of a search service to make search requests, and
(b) generate responses to those requests.

**117 Providers that are not legal persons**


(1) In this section a “relevant entity” means an entity that—
(a) is the provider of a regulated service, and
(b) is not a legal person under the law under which it is formed.


(2) If a penalty notice is given to a relevant entity (in the name of the entity), the
penalty is to be paid out of the funds of the entity.


(3) If a notice under Chapter 4 (use of technology), Chapter 5 (information) or
Chapter 6 (enforcement) of Part 4 is given to a relevant entity (in the name of
the entity), the notice continues to have effect despite a change in the
membership of the entity.


(4) If a penalty notice is given jointly to two or more officers or members of a
relevant entity, those individuals are jointly and severally liable to pay the
penalty under it.


(5) In subsection (4) the reference to officers or members of a relevant entity
includes a reference to employees of such an entity or any other individuals
associated with such an entity.


(6) In this section a “penalty notice” means—
(a) a confirmation decision that imposes a penalty (see section 83(6)),
(b) a penalty notice under section 84(3),
(c) a penalty notice under section 89, or
(d) a penalty notice under section 90.

**118 Individuals providing regulated services: liability**


(1) This section applies in relation to two or more individuals who together are the
provider of a regulated service (see section 116(3), (6) and (8)).


(2) Any duty or requirement imposed on such a provider under Chapter 2 of Part
2 (providers of user-to-user services: duties of care), Chapter 3 of Part 2
(providers of search services: duties of care), Chapter 4 of Part 2 (assessment
about access by children) or section 51 (duty to notify OFCOM), or any liability
of such a provider to pay a fee under section 52, is to be taken to be imposed
on, or to be a liability of, all the individuals jointly and severally.


(3) Any notice under Chapter 4 (use of technology), Chapter 5 (information) or
Chapter 6 (enforcement) of Part 4 in respect of a matter may be given—
(a) to only one of the individuals,
(b) jointly to two or more of them, or
(c) jointly to all of them,
but a separate notice may not be given to each of the individuals in respect of
the matter.


(4) If a penalty notice is given jointly to two or more individuals, those individuals
are jointly and severally liable to pay the penalty under it.


(5) In subsection (4) a “penalty notice” means—
(a) a confirmation decision that imposes a penalty (see section 83(6)),
(b) a penalty notice under section 84(3),
(c) a penalty notice under section 89, or
(d) a penalty notice under section 90.

**119 Liability of parent entities for failures by subsidiary entities**


(1) Subsection (2) applies if—
(a) OFCOM are satisfied that there are grounds to give an entity (“E”) a
relevant decision or notice relating to a regulated service,
(b) E is the provider of that service, and
(c) there is an entity which is a parent undertaking in relation to E.


(2) The relevant decision or notice may be given—
(a) to E alone, or
(b) jointly to E and to an entity which is a parent undertaking in relation to
E.


(3) But the decision or notice may not be given to an entity which is a parent
undertaking unless that entity has been given an opportunity to make
representations to OFCOM.


(4) If a relevant decision or notice is given to entities jointly as mentioned in
subsection (2)(b), those entities are jointly and severally liable to comply with
the requirements, or (as the case may be) pay the penalty, imposed by the
decision or notice.


(5) For the purposes of this section, an entity is a “parent undertaking” in relation
to E if that entity is a parent undertaking in relation to E within the meaning of
section 1162 of the Companies Act 2006 by reason of meeting the condition in
subsection (2)(b), (c) or (d) or (4) of that section.


(6) In its application for the purposes of this section, paragraph 4 of Schedule 7 to
the Companies Act 2006 is to be read as if the reference to operating and
financial policies were to policies relating to compliance with the regulatory
requirements imposed by this Act.


(7) For the purposes of this section, section 1162 of, and Schedule 7 to, the
Companies Act 2006—
(a) are to apply in relation to an entity which is not an undertaking (as
defined in section 1161(1) of that Act) as they apply in relation to an
undertaking, and
(b) are to be read with any necessary modifications if applied to an entity
formed under the law of a country outside the United Kingdom.


(8) In this section, “relevant decision or notice” means—
(a) a confirmation decision,
(b) a penalty notice under section 84(3),
(c) a penalty notice under section 89, or
(d) a penalty notice under section 90.

**120 Liability of controlling individuals for failures by entities**


(1) Subsection (2) applies if—
(a) OFCOM are satisfied that there are grounds to give an entity (“E”) a
relevant decision or notice relating to a regulated service,
(b) E is the provider of that service, and
(c) an individual or individuals control E.


(2) The relevant decision or notice may be given—


(a) to E alone, or
(b) jointly to E and to the individual or individuals who control E.


(3) But the decision or notice may not be given to an individual or individuals
unless that individual or those individuals have been given an opportunity to
make representations to OFCOM.


(4) If a relevant decision or notice is given jointly to E and to an individual or
individuals as mentioned in subsection (2)(b), that entity and that individual or
those individuals are jointly and severally liable to comply with the
requirements, or (as the case may be) pay the penalty, imposed by the decision
or notice.


(5) For the purposes of this section, an individual or individuals are to be taken to
“control” E if that individual or those individuals would, if they were an
undertaking, be a parent undertaking in relation to E within the meaning of
section 1162 of the Companies Act 2006 by reason of meeting the condition in
subsection (2)(b), (c) or (d) or (4)(a) of that section.


(6) In its application for the purposes of this section, paragraph 4 of Schedule 7 to
the Companies Act 2006 is to be read as if the reference to operating and
financial policies were to policies relating to compliance with the regulatory
requirements imposed by this Act.


(7) For the purposes of this section, section 1162 of, and Schedule 7 to, the
Companies Act 2006—
(a) are to apply in relation to an entity which is not an undertaking (as
defined in section 1161(1) of that Act) as they apply in relation to an
undertaking, and
(b) are to be read with any necessary modifications if applied to an entity
formed under the law of a country outside the United Kingdom.


(8) In this section, “relevant decision or notice” means—
(a) a confirmation decision,
(b) a penalty notice under section 84(3),
(c) a penalty notice under section 89, or
(d) a penalty notice under section 90.

**121 Liability of subsidiary entities for failures by parent or fellow subsidiary
entities**


(1) Subsection (2) applies if—
(a) OFCOM are satisfied that there are grounds to give an entity (“E”) a
relevant decision or notice relating to a regulated service,
(b) E is the provider of that service, and
(c) E is a parent undertaking in relation to another undertaking.


(2) The relevant decision or notice may be given—
(a) to E alone, or
(b) jointly to E and to an entity which is a subsidiary undertaking of E.


(3) But the decision or notice may be given to an entity which is a subsidiary
undertaking only if—
(a) that entity’s acts or omissions contributed to the failure in respect of
which the decision or notice is given, and


(b) that entity has been given an opportunity to make representations to
OFCOM.


(4) Subsection (5) applies if—
(a) OFCOM are satisfied that there are grounds to give an entity (“E”) a
relevant decision or notice relating to a regulated service,
(b) E is the provider of that service,
(c) E is a subsidiary undertaking, and
(d) there are, in relation to E, one or more entities which are fellow
subsidiary undertakings.


(5) The relevant decision or notice may be given—
(a) to E alone, or
(b) jointly to E and to an entity which is a fellow subsidiary undertaking.


(6) But the decision or notice may be given to an entity which is a fellow subsidiary
undertaking only if—
(a) that entity’s acts or omissions contributed to the failure in respect of
which the decision or notice is given, and
(b) that entity has been given an opportunity to make representations to
OFCOM.


(7) If a relevant decision or notice is given to entities jointly as mentioned in
subsection (2)(b) or (5)(b), those entities are jointly and severally liable to
comply with the requirements, or (as the case may be) pay the penalty,
imposed by the decision or notice.


(8) In this section—
“fellow subsidiary undertaking” has the meaning given by section 1161(4)
of the Companies Act 2006;
“parent undertaking” is to be read in accordance with section 1162 of the
Companies Act 2006;
“relevant decision or notice” means—
(a) a confirmation decision,
(b) a penalty notice under section 84(3),
(c) a penalty notice under section 89, or
(d) a penalty notice under section 90;
“subsidiary undertaking” is to be read in accordance with section 1162 of
the Companies Act 2006.


(9) For the purposes of this section, sections 1161(4) and 1162 of, and Schedule 7
to, the Companies Act 2006—
(a) are to apply in relation to an entity which is not an undertaking (as
defined in section 1161(1) of that Act) as they apply in relation to an
undertaking, and
(b) are to be read with any necessary modifications if applied to an entity
formed under the law of a country outside the United Kingdom.


Users of regulated services

**122 “User” and “United Kingdom user” of service**


(1) For the purposes of this Act a user is a “United Kingdom user” of a service if—


(a) where the user is an individual, the individual is in the United
Kingdom;
(b) where the user is an entity, the entity is incorporated or formed under
the law of any part of the United Kingdom.


(2) For the purposes of references in this Act to a user of a service it does not matter
whether a person is registered to use a service.


(3) References in this Act to a user of a service do not include references to any of
the following when acting in the course of the provider’s business—
(a) where the provider of the service is an individual or individuals, that
individual or those individuals;
(b) where the provider is an entity, officers of the entity;
(c) persons who work for the provider (including as employees or
volunteers);
(d) any other person providing a business service to the provider such as a
contractor, consultant or auditor.


(4) In subsection (3) “acting in the course of the provider’s business” means (as the
case may be)—
(a) acting in the course of the provider’s business of providing the service,
or
(b) acting in the course of a business, trade, profession or other concern—
(i) carried on (whether or not for profit) by the provider of the
service, and
(ii) for the purposes of which the service is provided.


(5) In subsection (3) “officer” includes a director, manager, partner, associate,
secretary or other similar officer.


(6) In this section “service” (except in the term “business service”) means internet
service, user-to-user service or search service.


Supplementary provision about offences

**123 Information offences: supplementary**


(1) Proceedings for an offence under section 72(2) may be brought in respect of a
failure by a person to comply with the requirements of an information notice
only if—
(a) OFCOM have given the person a provisional notice of enforcement
action in respect of that failure,
(b) OFCOM have given the person a confirmation decision in respect of
that failure and the time allowed under that decision has expired
without the requirements of the information notice having been
complied with,
(c) OFCOM have not imposed a penalty on the person in respect of that
failure,
(d) a service restriction order under section 91 has not been made in
relation to a regulated service provided by the person in respect of that
failure, and
(e) an access restriction order under section 93 has not been made in
relation to a regulated service provided by the person in respect of that
failure.

(2) Proceedings for an offence under section 73(2) (failure by named senior
manager to prevent offence under section 72(2)) may be brought only if the
conditions in subsection (1) are met in respect of the offence under section
72(2).


(3) A person on whom a penalty is imposed may not at any time be convicted of
an offence under section 72 in respect of the act or omission giving rise to the
penalty.


(4) An individual may not at any time be convicted of an offence under section 73
in respect of a failure to prevent an offence by an entity under section 72, if a
penalty is imposed on the entity in respect of the act or omission constituting
the offence under section 72.


(5) In this section “penalty” means a penalty imposed by—
(a) a confirmation decision (see section 83(6)), or
(b) a penalty notice under section 84(3).

**124 Defences**


(1) Subsection (2) applies where a person relies on a defence under section 72 or 73.


(2) If evidence is adduced which is sufficient to raise an issue with respect to the
defence, the court must assume that the defence is satisfied unless the
prosecution proves beyond reasonable doubt that it is not.

**125 Liability of corporate officers for information offences**


(1) In this section a “relevant entity” means an entity that is—
(a) the provider of a regulated service, and
(b) a legal person under the law under which it is formed.


(2) If an offence under section 72 committed by a relevant entity is proved to have
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or to be attributable to any
neglect on the part of, an officer, the officer (as well as the entity) is guilty of the
offence and (subject to section 123(1)) is liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.


(3) In relation to an entity which is a body corporate, “officer” means—
(a) a person occupying the position of a director, manager, secretary or
other similar officer of the entity (by whatever name called), or
(b) a person purporting to act in any such capacity.


(4) In relation to a partnership which is not regarded as a body corporate under
the law under which it is formed, “officer” means—
(a) a partner, or
(b) a person purporting to act as a partner.


(5) If the affairs of an entity which is a body corporate are managed by its
members, subsection (2) applies in relation to the acts and omissions of a
member in connection with the functions of management as if the member
were an officer of the entity.


(6) In this section “body corporate” includes an entity incorporated outside the
United Kingdom.

**126 Application of information offences to providers that are not legal persons**


(1) In this section a “relevant entity” means an entity that—
(a) is the provider of a regulated service, and
(b) is not a legal person under the law under which it is formed.


(2) Proceedings for an offence under section 72 alleged to have been committed by
a relevant entity must be brought against the entity in its own name (and not
in that of any of its officers, members or partners).


(3) For the purposes of such proceedings—
(a) rules of court relating to the service of documents have effect as if the
entity were a body corporate; and
(b) the following provisions apply as they apply in relation to a body
corporate—
(i) section 33 of the Criminal Justice Act 1925 and Schedule 3 to the
Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980;
(ii) section 18 of the Criminal Justice Act (Northern Ireland) 1945
(c. 15 (N.I.)) and Article 166 of, and Schedule 4 to, the
Magistrates’ Courts (Northern Ireland) Order 1981 (S.I. 1981/
1675 (N.I. 26)).


(4) A fine imposed on a relevant entity on its conviction of an offence under
section 72 is to be paid out of the entity’s funds.


(5) If an offence under section 72 committed by a relevant entity is proved to have
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or to be attributable to any
neglect on the part of, an officer, the officer (as well as the entity) is guilty of the
offence and (subject to section 123(1)) is liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.


(6) In relation to a partnership, “officer” means—
(a) a partner, or
(b) a person purporting to act as a partner.


(7) In relation to a relevant entity other than a partnership, “officer” means—
(a) an officer of the entity or a person concerned in the management or
control of the entity, or
(b) a person purporting to act in such a capacity.


(8) Subsection (2) is not to be read as prejudicing any liability of an officer under
subsection (5).


Extra-territorial application

**127 Extra-territorial application**


(1) References in this Act to an internet service, a user-to-user service or a search
service include such a service provided from outside the United Kingdom (as
well as such a service provided from within the United Kingdom).


(2) The power by notice under section 70 to require the production of documents
includes a power for such a notice to require the production of documents held
outside the United Kingdom.

(3) The power conferred by section 76 includes a power to require the attendance
for interview of an individual who is outside the United Kingdom.

**128 Information offences: extra-territorial application and jurisdiction**


(1) Section 72 applies to acts done in the United Kingdom or elsewhere by a
provider of a regulated service (information offences).


(2) Section 73 applies to acts done in the United Kingdom or elsewhere by an
individual (offences by senior managers of providers of regulated services).


(3) Sections 125(2) and 126(5) apply to acts done in the United Kingdom or
elsewhere by an individual (liability of directors etc of providers of regulated
services).


(4) In the case of an offence under section 72 or 73 which is committed outside the
United Kingdom—
(a) proceedings for the offence may be taken at any place in the United
Kingdom, and
(b) the offence may for all incidental purposes be treated as having been
committed at any such place.


(5) In the application of subsection (4) to Scotland, any such proceedings against a
person may be taken—
(a) in any sheriff court district in which the person is apprehended or is in
custody, or
(b) in such sheriff court district as the Lord Advocate may determine.


(6) In this section—
“act” includes a failure to act;
“sheriff court district” is to be construed in accordance with the Criminal
Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 (see section 307(1) of that Act).


Service of notices

**129 Service of notices**


(1) This section applies in relation to a notice given by OFCOM to a person
under—
(a) section 49(1) (notice relating to transparency report),
(b) Chapter 4 of Part 4 (use of technology),
(c) Chapter 5 of Part 4 (information),
(d) Chapter 6 of Part 4 (enforcement powers), or
(e) section 112(4) or (5) (public statement notice etc).


(2) OFCOM may give a notice to a person by—
(a) handing it to the person,
(b) leaving it at the person’s proper address,
(c) sending it by post to the person at that address, or
(d) sending it by email to the person’s email address.


(3) A notice to a body corporate may be given to any officer of that body.

(4) A notice to a partnership may be given to a partner or a person who has the
control or management of the partnership business.


(5) A notice to an entity that is not a legal person under the law under which it is
formed (other than a partnership) may be given to any member of the
governing body of the entity.


(6) In the case of a notice given to a person who is a provider of a regulated service,
the person’s proper address for the purposes of paragraphs (b) and (c) of
subsection (2), and section 7 of the Interpretation Act 1978 in its application to
those paragraphs, is any address (within or outside the United Kingdom) at
which OFCOM believe, on reasonable grounds, that the notice will come to the
attention of the person or (where the person is an entity) any director or other
officer of that entity.


(7) In the case of a notice given to a person other than a provider of a regulated
service, a person’s proper address for the purposes of paragraphs (b) and (c) of
subsection (2), and section 7 of the Interpretation Act 1978 in its application to
those paragraphs, is—
(a) in the case of an entity, the address of the entity’s registered or principal
office;
(b) in any other case, the person’s last known address.


(8) In the case of an entity registered or carrying on business outside the United
Kingdom, or with offices outside the United Kingdom, the reference in
subsection (7) to its principal office includes its principal office in the United
Kingdom or, if the entity has no office in the United Kingdom, any place in the
United Kingdom at which OFCOM believe, on reasonable grounds, that the
notice will come to the attention of any director or other officer of that entity.


(9) For the purposes of subsection (2)(d), a person’s email address is—
(a) any email address published for the time being by that person as an
address for contacting that person, or
(b) if there is no such published address, any email address by means of
which OFCOM believe, on reasonable grounds, that the notice will
come to the attention of that person or (where that person is an entity)
any director or other officer of that entity.


(10) A notice sent to a person by email is to be taken to have been given to that
person 48 hours after it is sent.


(11) In this section—
“director” includes any person occupying the position of a director, by
whatever name called;
“officer”, in relation to an entity, includes a director, a manager, a
secretary or, where the affairs of the entity are managed by its
members, a member.


Repeals

**130 Repeal of Part 4B of the Communications Act**


(1) In the Communications Act, omit Part 4B (video-sharing platform services).


(2) In the Audiovisual Media Services Regulations 2020 (S.I. 2020/1062), omit Part
4 (which inserts Part 4B into the Communications Act).




**131 Repeals: Digital Economy Act 2017**


(1) The Digital Economy Act 2017 is amended as follows.


(2) Omit Part 3 (online pornography).


(3) Omit section 103 (code of practice for providers of online social media
platforms).


Regulations

**132 Regulations**


(1) Regulations under this Act may make different provision for different
purposes and may, in particular—
(a) make different provision with regard to—
(i) user-to-user services, and
(ii) search services;
(b) make different provision with regard to user-to-user services of
different kinds;
(c) make different provision with regard to search services of different
kinds.


(2) Regulations under this Act may make supplemental, incidental, consequential,
transitional or saving provision.


(3) Any power of the Secretary of State under this Act to make regulations is
exercisable by statutory instrument.


(4) A statutory instrument containing (whether alone or with other provision)—
(a) regulations under section 3(8), (9) or (11),
(b) regulations under section 30(5),
(c) regulations under section 39(12) or (13),
(d) regulations under section 42(2),
(e) regulations under section 43(2),
(f) regulations under section 51(8),
(g) regulations under section 85(14), or
(h) regulations under section 106(3),
may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before, and
approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.


(5) A statutory instrument containing—
(a) regulations under section 41,
(b) regulations under section 45,
(c) regulations under section 46,
(d) regulations under section 49(6) or (7),
(e) regulations under section 107, or
(f) regulations under paragraph 1 of Schedule 4,
is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of
Parliament.


(6) But on the occasion of the first exercise of the power to make regulations
under—

(a) section 41,
(b) section 45, or
(c) section 46,
the instrument containing the regulations may not be made unless a draft of
the instrument has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each
House of Parliament.


(7) Regulations made by the Scottish Ministers under section 43(3) are subject to
the affirmative procedure (see section 29 of the Interpretation and Legislative
Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 (asp 10)).


(8) This section does not apply to regulations under section 140 (commencement).


Interpretation

**133 Meaning of “internet service”**


(1) In this Act “internet service” means a service that is made available by means
of the internet.


(2) For the purposes of subsection (1) a service is “made available by means of the
internet” even where it is made available by means of a combination of—
(a) the internet, and
(b) an electronic communications service.


(3) “Electronic communications service” has the same meaning as in the
Communications Act (see section 32(2) of that Act).

**134 Meaning of terms relating to search services**


(1) This section applies for the purposes of this Act.


(2) “Search engine”—
(a) includes a service or functionality which enables a person to search
some websites or databases (as well as a service or functionality which
enables a person to search (in principle) all websites or databases);
(b) does not include a service which enables a person to search just one
website or database.


(3) “Search” means search by any means, including by input of text or images or
by speech, and references to a search request are to be construed accordingly.


(4) “Search results”, in relation to a search service, means content presented to a
user of the service by operation of the search engine in response to a search
request made by the user.


(5) But “search results” does not include paid-for advertisements (as defined in
section 39(7)).


(6) References in this Act to encountering content “via search results”—
(a) are to encountering content as a result of interacting with search results
(for example, by clicking on them);
(b) do not include references to encountering content as a result of
subsequent interactions with an internet service other than the search
service.


(7) “Interested person”, in relation to a search service, means a person that is
responsible for a website or database capable of being searched by the search
engine, provided that—
(a) in the case of an individual, the individual is in the United Kingdom;
(b) in the case of an entity, the entity is incorporated or formed under the
law of any part of the United Kingdom.


(8) In subsections (4), (6) and (7), references to a search service include references
to a user-to-user service that includes a search engine.

**135 Meaning of “functionality”**


(1) In this Act “functionality”, in relation to a user-to-user service, includes any
feature that enables interactions of any description between users of the service
by means of the service, and includes any feature enabling a user to do
anything listed in subsection (2).


(2) The things are—
(a) creating a user profile, including an anonymous or pseudonymous
profile;
(b) searching within the service for user-generated content or other users
of the service;
(c) forwarding content to, or sharing content with, other users of the
service;
(d) sharing content on other internet services;
(e) sending direct messages to or speaking to other users of the service, or
interacting with them in another way (for example by playing a game);
(f) expressing a view on content, including, for example, by—
(i) applying a “like” or “dislike” button or other button of that
nature,
(ii) applying an emoji or symbol of any kind,
(iii) engaging in yes/no voting, or
(iv) rating or scoring content in any way (including giving star or
numerical ratings);
(g) sharing current or historic location information with other users of the
service, recording a user’s movements, or identifying which other users
of the service are nearby;
(h) following or subscribing to particular kinds of content or particular
users of the service;
(i) creating lists, collections, archives or directories of content or users of
the service;
(j) tagging or labelling content present on the service;
(k) uploading content relating to goods or services;
(l) applying or changing settings on the service which affect the
presentation of user-generated content on the service;
(m) accessing other internet services through content present on the service
(for example through hyperlinks).


(3) In this Act “functionality”, in relation to a search service, includes (in
particular) a feature that enables users to search websites or databases.


(4) In this section “user-generated content” has the meaning given by section 39
(see subsections (3) and (4) of that section).


**136 Meaning of “online safety functions” and “online safety matters”**


(1) In this Act references to OFCOM’s “online safety functions”—
(a) are references to the functions that OFCOM have under the following
enactments—
(i) this Act,
(ii) section 3 of the Communications Act (general duties), so far as
duties under that section relate to a function which is an online
safety function by reason of any other provision of this
subsection,
(iii) section 7 of the Communications Act (duty to carry out impact
assessments), so far as functions under that section relate to
regulated services,
(iv) section 11 of the Communications Act (duty to promote media
literacy), so far as functions under that section relate to
regulated services,
(v) section 14(6)(a) of the Communications Act (research about
media literacy), so far as the function under that provision
relates to regulated services,
(vi) section 14(6B) of the Communications Act (research about
users’ experience of regulated services);
(b) include references to OFCOM’s power to do anything appearing to
them to be incidental or conducive to the carrying out of any of their
functions mentioned in paragraph (a)(i), (iii), (iv), (v) or (vi) (see section
1(3) of the Communications Act).


(2) In this Act “online safety matters” means the matters to which OFCOM’s
online safety functions relate.

**137 Interpretation**


(1) In this Act—
“adult” means a person aged 18 or over;
“child” means a person under the age of 18;
“the Communications Act” means the Communications Act 2003;
“confirmation decision” means a confirmation decision under section 83;
“content” means anything communicated by means of an internet service,
whether publicly or privately, including written material or messages,
oral communications, photographs, videos, visual images, music and
data of any description;
“the Convention” has the meaning given by section 21(1) of the Human
Rights Act 1998;
“country” includes territory;
“encounter”, in relation to content, means read, view, hear or otherwise
experience content;
“entity” means a body or association of persons or an organisation,
regardless of whether the body, association or organisation is—
(a) formed under the law of any part of the United Kingdom or of
a country outside the United Kingdom, or
(b) a legal person under the law under which it is formed;
“functions” includes powers and duties;
“harm” means physical or psychological harm;


Part 7 — General and final provisions

#### 116


“information notice” means an information notice under section 70;
“likely to be accessed by children” is to be construed in accordance with
section 26 (see subsections (5) and (8) of that section);
“notice” means notice in writing;
“notify” means notify in writing, and “notification” is to be construed
accordingly;
“person” includes (in addition to an individual and a body of persons
corporate or unincorporate) any organisation or association of persons;
“provisional notice of enforcement action” means a provisional notice of
enforcement action under section 80;
“publicly available” means available to members of the public in the
United Kingdom;
“terms of service”, in relation to a user-to-user service, means the terms
and conditions for use of the service by United Kingdom users.


(2) References in this Act to “taking down” content are to any action that results in
content being removed from a user-to-user service or being permanently
hidden so users of the service cannot encounter it (and related expressions are
to be construed accordingly).


(3) For the purposes of this Act—
(a) any reference to the use of or access to a service, or to content present
on a service, is to be taken to include use of or access to the service or
content on registering or on the making of a payment or on
subscription;
(b) any reference to content that is made available or that may be accessed,
encountered or shared, is to be taken to include content that is made
available or that may be accessed, encountered or shared for a limited
period of time only.


**138 Index of defined expressions**


The Table below lists provisions which define or otherwise explain terms
defined for this Act or for a Part of this Act.


adult section 137


Category 1 service section 59(6)(a)


Category 2A service section 59(6)(b)


Category 2B service section 59(6)(c)


Chapter 2 safety duty (in Part 2) section 48


Chapter 3 safety duty (in Part 2) section 48


child section 137


the Communications Act section 137


confirmation decision section 137


content section 137


content that is harmful to adults (in Part 2) section 46


content that is harmful to children (in Part 2) section 45


the Convention section 137


country section 137


CSEA content (in Part 2) section 41


CSEA offence (in Part 2) section 43


encounter section 137


entity section 137


functionality section 135


functions section 137


harm section 137


illegal content (in Part 2) section 41


information notice section 137


interested person section 134


internet service section 133 (see also
section 127(1))


likely to be accessed by children sections 26 and 137


news publisher content (in Part 2) section 39(8) to (10)


non-designated content that is harmful to
children (in Part 2)


section 45


notice section 137


notify section 137


online safety functions section 136


online safety matters section 136


person section 137


primary priority content that is harmful to
children (in Part 2)


section 45


priority content that is harmful to adults (in
Part 2)


section 46


priority content that is harmful to children
(in Part 2)


section 45


priority illegal content (in Part 2) section 41


provider section 116

#### 5

#### 10

#### 15

#### 20

#### 25

#### 30



Part 7 — General and final provisions

#### 118


Final provisions

**139 Extent**


This Act extends to England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.

**140 Commencement**


(1) The following provisions come into force on the day on which this Act is
passed—
(a) sections 1 and 2,
(b) section 3(1) to (7) and Schedule 1,
(c) section 4,
(d) section 39(1) to (11) and (14),


provisional notice of enforcement action section 137


publicly available section 137


recognised news publisher (in Part 2) section 40


regulated content (in Part 2) section 39


regulated search service section 3(4)


regulated service section 3(2)


regulated user-to-user service section 3(3)


search section 134


search engine section 134


search request section 134


search results section 134


search service section 2 (see also
section 127(1))


taking down (content) section 137(2)


terms of service section 137


terrorism content (in Part 2) section 41


terrorism offence (in Part 2) section 42


United Kingdom user section 122


user section 122


user-generated content (in Part 2) section 39(3) and (4)


user-to-user service section 2 (see also
section 127(1))


via search results section 134


(e) sections 40 and 41,
(f) section 42(1) and Schedule 2,
(g) section 43(1) and Schedule 3,
(h) sections 44 to 46,
(i) section 47(1) and (2),
(j) section 48,
(k) section 106(3) to (6),
(l) section 107,
(m) section 116,
(n) section 122,
(o) section 127(1),
(p) sections 132 to 135,
(q) sections 137 to 139,
(r) this section, and
(s) section 141.


(2) The remaining provisions of this Act come into force on such day as the
Secretary of State may by regulations appoint.


(3) Different days may be appointed for different purposes.


(4) The day appointed for the coming into force of—
(a) section 71 (requirement to name a senior manager), and
(b) section 73 (senior managers’ liability: information offences),
may not be a day that precedes the publication of the report on the outcome of
the review required by section 115 (Secretary of State’s review).


(5) The Secretary of State may by regulations make transitional or saving
provision in connection with the coming into force of any provision of this Act.


(6) Any power under this section to make regulations is exercisable by statutory
instrument.

**141 Short title**


This Act may be cited as the Online Safety Act 2021.


#### EXPLANATORY NOTES FOR THIS SECTION

Part 7: General and Final Provisions
Providers of regulated services

Clause 116: ‘Provider’ of user-to-user service or search service

The Online Safety Bill places duties on providers of user-to-user and search
services. This clause operates to determine who is the ‘provider’ of such a service,
and therefore who is subject to the duties imposed on providers.
For user-to-user services, subsection (2) sets out that the provider is the
entity (that is the body or association of persons or organisation (see clause 137(1))
which controls who can use the user-to-user service.
Subsection (3) makes it clear that, if use of a service is controlled by an
individual (or individuals) rather than an entity, that individual (or those individuals)
will be considered the provider of the service.
Subsection (4) clarifies that someone who provides an access facility in
relation to a user-to-user service, which is a facility that can be withdrawn, adapted or
manipulated in order to impede access to the user-to-user service (see clause 93), is
not a provider of that service. Examples of “access facilities” would include internet
access services, web hosting services, domain name services, security software,
content delivery network services, app stores and payment service providers. This
subsection therefore establishes and highlights the distinction between the provider
of a user-to-user service itself and the provider of any services which enable the
regulated service to function.
Furthermore, enterprise software, such as software-as-a-service products,
also counts as an access facility; therefore, this subsection makes clear that where
multiple entities (or individuals) may be involved in the provision of a service to the
end user, it is only the entity with control over who can use the service which is to be
considered the service provider. For example, if entity A buys software from software
company B on a software-as-a-service basis, and the software enables entity A to
create a regulated service, entity A (rather than software company B) is to be
considered the service provider.
Subsections (5) and (6) set out that a provider of a search service is the entity
(that is the body or association of persons or organisation (see clause 137)) which
controls its operations. If no entity controls the service, but rather an individual or
individuals have control over its operations, that individual or those individuals will be
considered to be the provider. As set out in subsection (9), the operations of the
search service are taken to mean operations which enable users to make search
requests, and which subsequently generate responses to those requests.
Subsections (7) and (8) state that if a user-to-user service or a search service
is generated by a machine (such as an algorithm), then the entity - or, if there is no
entity, the individual or individuals - that controls the machine will be the provider of
the service.
These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)
Clause 117: Providers that are not legal persons

Subsection (1) sets out the definition of a “relevant entity”, which is a provider
of a regulated service that does not have a separate legal existence. A partnership or
an unincorporated association (a group that agrees to come together for a specific
purpose) would both be examples of bodies which do not have a separate legal
existence. On the other hand, a company would have its own separate legal
existence, and therefore could not be a relevant entity for the purposes of this clause.
Subsection (2) states that penalty notices given to relevant entities are to be
paid from the entity’s funds. The definition of “penalty notice” for this clause is set out
in subsection (6), and comprises: a confirmation decision (clause 83), a penalty
notice for failure to comply with various requirements in a confirmation decision
(clause 84), a penalty notice for non-payment of a fee (clause 89), and a penalty
notice for failure to comply with a use of technology notice (clause 90).
Subsection (3) states that notices issued to a relevant entity under Chapter 4
(use of technology), Chapter 5 (information) or Chapter 6 (enforcement) of Part 4 of
the Online Safety Bill will continue to have effect regardless of any changes to the
entity’s membership.
Subsection (4) states that when a penalty notice is given jointly to two or more
officers or members of a relevant entity (which subsection (5) provides includes
employees of the entity or individuals associated with the entity), those individuals
are jointly and severally liable to pay the penalty. This means that any of those
individuals can be pursued for full payment of the penalty.
Clause 118: Individuals providing regulated services: liability

This clause sets out how liability under the Online Safety Bill applies to a
group of two or more individuals who together are providers of a regulated service.
Subsection (2) sets out that, where a duty or requirement is imposed under
Chapters 2, 3 and 4 of Part 2 (duties of care), clause 51 (fees: duty to notify) or
clause 52 (duty to pay fees) on a group of two or more individuals who together
provide a regulated service, that duty or requirement is to be taken to be imposed on
both (or all) of the individuals jointly and severally. This means that any of those
individuals can be pursued for full payment of the penalty.
Subsection (3) sets out that any notice under Chapter 4 (use of technology),
Chapter 5 (information), or Chapter 6 (enforcement) of Part 4 in respect of a
regulated service provided by a group of two or more individuals may be either given
to one individual, or jointly to two or more of the individuals.
Subsection (4) provides that, where a penalty notice is given jointly to two or
more individuals, those individuals are jointly and severally liable to pay the penalty
contained in that notice. As noted above, this means that any of those individuals can
be pursued for full payment of the penalty.
These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)
Subsection (5) explains that penalty notices under this clause are
confirmation decisions that impose a penalty (clause 83), penalty notices for failure to
comply with various requirements in a confirmation decision (clause 84), penalty
notices for non-payment of a fee (clause 89), and penalty notices for failure to
comply with a use of technology notice (clause 90).
Clause 119: Liability of parent entities for failures by subsidiary entities

This clause explains how parent entities can be liable for failures of their
subsidiary entities to comply with various duties and requirements imposed on them
by the Online Safety Bill.
Subsection (1) makes clear that in order for subsection (2) to apply OFCOM
must first have grounds to issue the subsidiary entity (“E”) with a relevant decision or
notice in respect of a regulated service which E provides, and E must have a parent
undertaking. The list of relevant decisions and notices are set out in subsection (8),
and comprise: a confirmation decision (clause 83), a penalty notice for failure to
comply with various requirements in a confirmation decision (clause 84), a penalty
notice for non-payment of a fee (clause 89), or a penalty notice for failure to comply
with a use of technology notice (clause 90).
Once the conditions in subsection (1) are met, subsection (2) provides that a
relevant decision or notice may be given only to E or jointly to both E and the parent
undertaking. However, subsection (3) provides that, before such a decision or notice
can be issued to the parent undertaking, the parent undertaking must have been
given an opportunity to make representations to OFCOM.
Subsection (4) sets out that if a decision or notice is given to both E and the
parent undertaking, then both entities are jointly and severally liable to comply with
the requirements, or pay the penalty imposed on them. As set out in subsection (5),
an entity will be a parent undertaking’ in relation to E if the entity satisfies the
circumstances in section 1162(2)(b), (2)(c), (2)(d) or (4) of the Companies Act 2006
in relation to E. These provisions in the Companies Act concern circumstances
demonstrating the level of control the parent entity has over the subsidiary entity.
In order to determine whether the circumstances in the relevant Companies
Act provisions exist, subsection (6) sets out how paragraph 4 of Schedule 7 to the
Companies Act 2006 it is to be read in order for a parent undertaking to be deemed
to have the right to exercise a dominant influence over E. It must be the case that the
parent undertaking has the right to give directions with respect to E’s policies relating
to compliance with the Online Safety Bill’s regulatory requirements, which E’s
directors are obliged to comply with.
Subsection (7) provides that, for the purposes of this clause, section 1162
(meaning of parent and subsidiary undertaking) and Schedule 7 of the Companies
Act 2006 apply to an entity which is not deemed to be an undertaking as if they were
an undertaking. These provisions are also to be read with any necessary modification
so that they can apply to an entity formed under the law of a country outside of the
UK.
These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)
Clause 120: Liability of controlling individuals for failures by entities

This clause explains the circumstances under which a controlling individual
can be found liable for the failure of an entity to adhere to duties or requirements
under the Online Safety Bill.
Subsection (2) provides that a relevant decision or notice may be given solely
to an entity (“E”), or jointly to E and to the individual or individuals who control E if the
conditions in subsection (1) are met. The conditions in subsection (1) are that (i)
OFCOM is satisfied that there are grounds to give E a relevant decision or notice, (ii)
E is the provider of that regulated service, and (iii) an individual(s) controls E. The
decision or notice may not be given to that individual(s) unless they have had the
opportunity to make representations to OFCOM (subsection (3)).
The list of relevant decisions and notices is set out in subsection (8): a
confirmation decision (clause 83), a penalty notice for failure to comply with various
requirements in a confirmation decision (clause 84), a penalty notice for non-payment
of a fee (clause 89), or a penalty notice for failure to comply with a use of technology
notice (clause 90).
Subsection (4) provides that, if a relevant decision or notice is given jointly to
E and to an individual(s), they are jointly and severally liable to comply with the
requirements set out in the decision or notice, and/or (if one is stipulated) to pay the
penalty imposed on them.
Subsection (5) sets out, for the purposes of this clause, when an individual(s)
would be deemed to control E. An individual or individuals will be deemed to be in
control of E where, if they were an undertaking, they would be considered to be a
parent undertaking within the meaning of section 1162 of the Companies Act 2006,
because they meet the conditions in subsections (2)(b), (2)(c) or (2)(d) or (4)(a) of
that section. The relevant conditions in subsection (2) are that (i) the individual(s) is a
member of E and has the right to appoint or remove a majority of the E’s board of
directors, or (ii) has a right to exercise a dominant influence over E (by virtue of
provisions in E’s articles or a control contract), or (iii) controls a majority of the voting
rights in E. The relevant condition in subsection (4)(a) is that the individual(s) has the
right to exercise, or actually exercises, dominant influence or control over E.
Subsection (6) specifies how paragraph 4 to Schedule 7 of the Companies
Act 2006 is to be applied to this section. The result of this subsection is that, when
considering whether an individual exercises a dominant influence over E by virtue of
provisions in E’s articles or a control contract, the individual should not be regarded
as having a dominant influence unless they have the right to give directions with
respect to policies related to compliance with the regulatory requirements imposed by
this Bill, and E’s directors are obliged to comply with these directions. This does not
apply when considering section 1162(4)(a) of the Companies Act 2006 (paragraph
(4)(3) of Schedule 7 to the Companies Act 2006).
Subsection (7) provides that, for the purposes of this section, section 1162
(parent and subsidiary undertaking) and Schedule 7 of the Companies Act 2006
apply to an entity which is not deemed to be an undertaking as if they were an
These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)
undertaking. These provisions are also to be read with any necessary modification so
that they can apply to an entity formed under the law of a country outside of the UK.
Clause 121: Liability of subsidiary entities for failures by parent or fellow subsidiary entities

This clause explains how a subsidiary entity can be found liable for failures of
their parent entity or another subsidiary entity to adhere to duties or requirements
under the Online Safety Bill.
Subsections (1) and (2) provide that, in a scenario where OFCOM is satisfied
that there are grounds to give an entity (“E”) a relevant decision or notice in relation
to a regulated service provided by E, and E is a parent undertaking in relation to
another undertaking (the subsidiary undertaking), OFCOM may either give said
decision or notice only to E or to both E and the subsidiary undertaking.
Subsection (3) provides, however, that OFCOM will only be able to issue the
decision or notice to both E and the subsidiary undertaking where the subsidiary
undertaking has contributed to the failure dealt with by the decision or notice. The
subsidiary undertaking must also have been given the opportunity to make
representations to OFCOM.
Subsections (4) and (5) provide that, in a scenario where OFCOM have
grounds to give E a relevant decision or notice relating to a regulated service
provided by E, and E is a subsidiary undertaking with one or more fellow subsidiary
undertakings, the relevant decision or note may be given only to E or jointly to E and
a fellow subsidiary undertaking.
Subsection (6) makes it clear that OFCOM will only be able to issue the
decision or notice to both E and a fellow subsidiary undertaking where the fellow
subsidiary undertaking has contributed to the failure dealt with by the decision or
notice. The fellow subsidiary undertaking must also have been given the opportunity
to make representations to OFCOM.
Subsection (7) sets out that if a decision or notice is given to both E and a
fellow subsidiary undertaking, then both entities will be jointly and severally liable to
comply, or pay the penalty imposed on them.
Subsection (8) provides that the terms ‘fellow subsidiary undertaking’, parent
undertaking’ and ‘subsidiary undertaking’ have the meaning given in sections 1161(4)
and 1162 of the Companies Act. The list of relevant decisions and notices are set out
in subsection (8), and comprise: a confirmation decision (clause 83), a penalty notice
for failure to comply with various requirements in a confirmation decision (clause 84),
a penalty notice for non-payment of a fee (clause 89), or a penalty notice for failure to
comply with a use of technology notice (clause 90).
Subsection (9)(a) provides that the definition of undertakings in section
1161 (1) of the Companies Act 2006 for the purpose of this clause of the Bill is to
apply in relation to an entity which is not an undertaking under that definition as if
they were an undertaking. Subsection (9)(b) also allows for sections 1161(4) and
1162 of, and Schedule 7 to, the Companies Act 2008 to be read with any necessary
These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)
modifications required for entities that were formed under the law of a country outside
the UK.
Clause 122: “User” and “United Kingdom user” of service

This clause clarifies the term “United Kingdom user”, and also makes
provision in relation to the term “user” of an internet service, user-to-user service or
search service.
Subsection (1) states that a “United Kingdom user” covers an individual who
is in the United Kingdom, or an entity which is incorporated or formed under the law
in any part of the United Kingdom.
Subsections (2) makes clear that a person using a service counts as a “user”
whether or not they are registered with that service.
Subsection (3) outlines the circumstances where someone would not be
counted as a user. Specifically, the following would not count as users when acting in
the course of the provider’s business: individuals (where they are also the service
provider); officers of an entity (where that entity is the service provider); persons who
work for the provider; and anyone else providing a business service to the service
provider.
Subsection (4) defines “acting in the course of the provider’s business”. It
makes clear that an employee of Retailer X, which provided regulated Service A,
would not count as a user if uploading content to Service A in the course of their
employment by Retailer X, although they would count as a user of Service A if
uploading content to Service A in a personal capacity.
Clause 123: Information offences: supplementary

This clause sets out further detail on the offences of failing to comply with
requirements in an information notice (under clause 72) and on the liability of named
senior managers in connection with such an offence (under clause 73).
Subsection (1) confirms that proceedings for an offence in connection with a
failure by a person to comply with requirements in an information notice may be
brought only if:
a. the person has received a provisional notice of enforcement action;
b. they have received a confirmation decision in respect of that failure, and they
have not complied with the requirements of the original information notice by
a deadline set within the confirmation decision;
c. a penalty has not been imposed by OFCOM in respect of that failure; and
d. neither a service restriction order nor an access restriction order has been
made in respect of that failure.
Subsection (2) confirms that, if any proceedings are to be brought against a
senior manager for the offence of failing to prevent an offence of failing to comply
These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)
with an information notice, the conditions set out in subsection (1) must also be met
in relation to the alleged failure to comply with an information notice.
Subsection (3) provides that, where a penalty is imposed on a person, that
person may not at any time be convicted of an offence of failing to comply with an
information notice under clause 72, in respect of the act or omission that resulted in
the penalty. Subsection (4) similarly provides that a senior manager of an entity may
not at any time be convicted of an offence under clause 73 of failing to prevent that
entity failing to comply with an information notice if a penalty has already been
imposed on the entity in respect of its failure to comply with an information notice.
Subsection (5) set out that, for the purpose of this clause, ‘penalty’ refers to a
penalty imposed by a confirmation decision under clause 83(6) or by a penalty notice
under clause 84(3).
Clause 124: Defences

This clause applies where a person relies on a defence under clause 72 or
If evidence is provided which is sufficient to raise an issue with respect to the
defence, there is a presumption that the defence has been established unless the
prosecution can prove beyond any reasonable doubt that it is not.
Clause 125: Liability of corporate officers for information offences

This clause sets out the instances where officers of relevant entities may be
liable for information offences committed by that entity.
Subsection (1) defines the term ‘relevant entity’ for the purpose of this clause.
It provides that a relevant entity is an entity which is both a provider of a regulated
service and a legal person under the law under which it is formed.
Subsection (2) provides that, if an offence of failing to comply with an
information notice is committed by a relevant entity and that offence is proved to
have been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to the
neglect of an officer, both the officer and the relevant entity will be guilty of the
offence. So long as the requirements in clause 123(1) are complied with, both the
officer and the relevant entity are liable to criminal proceedings and sanctions.
Subsection (3) sets out that, where an entity is a body corporate, an ‘officer’ is
a person occupying the position of a director, manager, secretary or other similar
officer, regardless of their formal job title; or a person claiming to act in such capacity.
Subsection (5) confirms that, where the affairs of a body corporate are managed by
the members, a member is guilty of an offence of failing to comply with an
information notice and liable to criminal proceedings if a failure by the body corporate
to comply with an information notice is committed with the consent or connivance of,
or is attributable to the neglect of, that member in performing their management
functions. This offence is different in nature from the named senior manager offence
set out in section 73. Criminal liability for consent or connivance is a different kind of
These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)
liability, entirely contingent on the offence committed by the entity, whereas the
named senior managers’ offence under section 73 is an offence in its own right.
Subsection (4) sets out that, where the relevant entity is a partnership and is
not a body corporate, an ‘officer’ is a partner or someone purporting to act as such.
For both subsections (3) and (4), the term ‘body corporate’ includes an entity
that is incorporated outside of the United Kingdom (subsection (6)).
Clause 126: Application of information offences to providers that are not legal persons

This clause sets how information offences apply to providers that are not legal
persons. The definition of ‘relevant entity’ for the purposes of this clause is set out in
subsection (1) and means an entity which is a provider of a regulated service that
does not have a legal personality under the law under which it is formed. Under
English and Welsh law, a partnership and an unincorporated association (a group
that agrees to come together for a specific purpose) would both be examples of
entities which do not have a legal personality.
Subsection (2) specifies that proceedings for an offence (under clause 72)
alleged to have been committed by the relevant entity must be brought against the
entity in its own name. It must not be bought in the name of any of its officers,
members or partners.
Subsection (3) states that, for such proceedings, the rules of court relating to
service of documents have the same effect as if the entity were a body corporate
(e.g. a company), and that the listed provisions in subsection (3)(b) also apply as
they would apply in relation to a body corporate.
Subsection (4) states that a fine imposed on a relevant entity under clause 72
is to be paid out of the entity’s funds.
Subsection (5) provides that, if the relevant entity commits the offence of
failing to comply with an information notice, and this offence was committed with the
consent or connivance of, or can be attributed to, the neglect of an officer, then the
officer is also guilty of this offence. The officer is thus liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly, subject to clause 123(1). Subsection (8) provides that
subsection (2) does not prejudice the liability of an officer under subsection (5).
Subsections (6) and (7) define what is meant by ‘officer’ in relation to a
partnership or a relevant entity other than a partnership.
Clause 127: Extra-territorial application

This clause specifies that references to regulated services and OFCOM
information-gathering powers apply to services provided from outside the UK (as well
as to services provided from within the UK).
Subsection (1) states that the scope of the Bill extends to internet services,
user-to-user services, and search services provided from outside the United
Kingdom.
These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)
Subsection (2) specifies that OFCOM’s information-gathering powers under
clause 70 extend to requiring the production of documents held outside the United
Kingdom.
Subsection (3) states that OFCOM’s power to request interviews under
clause 76 extends to requiring the attendance of individuals who are outside the
United Kingdom.
Clause 128: Information offences: extra-territorial application and jurisdiction

This clause outlines that information offences apply to acts done in the United
Kingdom or elsewhere, and specifies how proceedings should be taken where acts
take place outside the United Kingdom.
Subsection (1) states that the offence in clause 72 applies to acts done in the
United Kingdom or elsewhere by a provider of a regulated service.
Subsection (2) states that the offence in clause 73 applies to acts done in the
United Kingdom or elsewhere by an individual.
Subsection (3) states that the offences in clauses 125(2) and 126(5) apply to
acts done in the United Kingdom or elsewhere by an individual.
Subsection (4) states that if an offence is committed under clause 72 or 73
outside the United Kingdom, proceedings may be taken at any place within the
United Kingdom, and the offence can be treated as having been committed at that
place within the United Kingdom. Subsection (5) details the courts at which such
legal action may be brought if the proceedings are to take place in Scotland.
Subsections (6) sets out definitions applicable to this clause.
Clause 129: Service of notices

This clause sets out the process for issuing notices relating to transparency
reports, use of technology notices, information notices, enforcement notices and
public statement notices to providers of regulated services both within, and outside of
the UK.
Subsections (2) and (6) provide that OFCOM can issue notices to a provider
of a regulated service by handing it to the relevant person, leaving it at or posting it to
any address where OFCOM have reasonable grounds to believe that the notice will
come to the attention of the relevant person, or by emailing it to the relevant person’s
email address. By virtue of subsection (9) a person’s email address is that which they
have published as the address to be contacted at or where there is no such address,
any email address OFCOM reasonably believe that the notice will come to the
relevant person’s attention. A notice sent by email is taken to have been given to that
person 48 hours after it is sent: see subsection (10).
Subsections (2) and (7) provide that OFCOM can give notice to a person who
is not a provider of a regulated service by handing it to the relevant person; where
the person is an entity, leaving it at or posting it to the entity’s registered or principal
These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)
office; where the person is not an entity, leaving it at or posting it to the person’s last
known address; or sending it by email to the person’s email address. Subsection (8)
states that, for entities which are registered, carrying on business, or with offices
outside the UK, its principal office includes its principal office in the UK or, should the
entity not have an office in the UK, any place within the UK at which OFCOM
reasonably believes the notice will come to the attention of a director or other officer.
Subsection (3) provides that, in the case of a company or other body
corporate, the relevant person to give notice to is any officer of that body. Subsection
(11) notes that, in this section, an officer includes a director (which is anyone who
has the role of a director, regardless of what they are called), a manager, a secretary
and a member, if the entity’s day to day affairs are controlled by its members.
Subsection (4) states that, for a partnership, the relevant person to give notice
to is either a partner or a person with control and management of the partnership.
Subsection (5) provides that for bodies which do not have a separate legal
existence, save for in the case of partnerships, the relevant person who should be
given notice is any member of the entity’s governing body. This subsection would
apply, for example, to an unincorporated association (a group that agrees to come
together for a specific purpose) but not to a company, as companies enjoy a legal
existence separate to that of their directors or shareholders.
Clause 130: Repeal of Part 4B of the Communications Act 2003

This deletes clauses pertaining to the regulation of video sharing platform
services from the Communications Act 2003 and the Audiovisual Media Services
Regulations 2020.
Clause 131: Repeals: Digital Economy Act 2017

This clause deletes Part 3 of the Digital Economy Act 2017 (which makes
provision in relation to online pornography and an age verification system) and
removes the obligation for the Secretary of State to issue a code of practice for
providers of online social media platforms by deleting section 103 of that Act.
Clause 132: Regulations

This clause sets out how the powers to make regulations conferred on the
Secretary of State and the Scottish Ministers will be used in practice.
As set out in subsection (1), regulations under this Act may make different
provisions for different purposes, with regard to both user-to-user services and
search services and to different types of services within these groups.
Subsection (2) explains that any regulations made using powers granted to
the Secretary of State by the Online Safety Bill must be made by statutory
instrument.
These regulations must be made using the affirmative resolution procedure,
where they relate to the following:
These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)
a. Exempting low-risk user-to-user or search services;
b. Varying the online safety objectives;
c. Repealing the exemption for comments and reviews on provider content;
d. Defining terrorism offences;
e. Defining child sexual exploitation and abuse (CSEA) offences;
f. Defining ‘qualifying worldwide revenue’ and ‘qualifying period’ for the purpose
of fees;
g. Defining ‘qualifying worldwide revenue’ for the purpose of penalties;
h. Defining which entities are eligible to make a super-complaint
Under the affirmative resolution procedure the regulations must receive explicit
approval from both Houses of Parliament before becoming law.
These regulations should generally be made using the negative procedure
where they relate to the following:
a. Meaning of “illegal content”;
b. Meaning of “content that is harmful to children”;
c. Meaning of “content that is harmful to adults”;
d. Transparency reports by service providers;
e. Procedural matters relating to super-complaints;
f. Threshold conditions for categories of regulated services.
Under the negative resolution procedure the regulations will be made (become law)
and be laid before Parliament, and will remain law unless Parliament votes to annul
them.
However, the first versions of regulations relating to the meaning of illegal
content, content that is harmful to children and content that is harmful to adults must
be made using the affirmative resolution procedure, and any subsequent versions of
these regulations should be made using the negative resolution procedure.
Subsection (7) explains that the Scottish Ministers must follow the affirmative
procedure in exercising their power to make regulations under clause 43(3).
Clause 133: Meaning of “internet service”

This clause sets out the meaning of the term “internet service”.
Subsection (2) specifies that services made available by means of the
internet and by an electronic communications service count as internet services. For
These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)
example, a service which is partly made available over the internet and partly by
routing through the public switched telephone network would count as an internet
service.
Subsection (3) provides that the term “electronic communications service” has
the same meaning as in section 32(2) of the Communications Act 2003. As
amended by the Electronic Communications and Wireless Telegraphy (Amendment)
(European Electronic Communications Code and EU Exit) Regulations 2020 (SI
2020/1419), that provision defines “electronic communications service” as a service
of any of the specified types provided by means of an electronic communications
network, except so far as it is a content service. The specified types of service are:
(a) an internet access service (i.e. a service that provides access to the internet and
thereby connectivity to virtually all end points of the internet, irrespective of the
network technology and terminal equipment used); (b) a number-based interpersonal
communications service; and (c) any other service consisting in, or having as its
principal feature, the conveyance of signals, such as a transmission service used for
machine-to-machine services or for broadcasting.
Clause 134: Meaning of terms relating to search services

This clause sets-out the meaning of “search engine”.
Subsection (2a) defines a search engine as including services or
functionalities which allow a user to search some websites or databases, as well as
services which allow a user to hypothetically search all websites or databases. This
differentiation ensures that search engines and vertical search engines are both in
regulatory scope. A vertical search engine is a search engine that is only focussed on
a specific topic or a genre of content, such as a search engine that only indexes
academic articles. Subsection (2b) clarifies that the definition does not include
services where a user can only search one website or database, thereby preventing
internal website search engines from being in regulatory scope.
Subsection (3) describes that a ‘search’ can be initiated by any means,
including the input of text, images or speech. This is designed to capture the variety
of different ways in which search engines can be operated, including speech based
virtual assistants such as Apple’s ‘Siri’ or Amazon’s ‘Alexa’.
Subsection (4) defines “search results”, while subsection (5) clarifies that this
definition does not extend to paid-for advertisements as set-out in clause 39 (7).
Subsection (6) states what is meant by references in the Bill to encountering
content “via search results.” Paragraph (b) makes clear that this term does not cover
any content encountered by a user on another service which is not presented to that
user in response to a search request.
Subsection (7) defines “interested person” in relation to a search service.
Clause 135: Meaning of “functionality”

These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)
This clause sets out the meaning of the term ‘functionality’.
Subsection (1) provides that, for user-to-user services, functionality refers to
service features which enable interactions between users, including features which
enable a user to do anything listed in subsection (2), such as creating a user profile
or sending direct messages to other service users. The list in subsection (2) is not an
exhaustive list of functionalities which may be found on regulated user-to-user
services. The examples included in subsection (2) are self-explanatory.
Subsection (3) indicates that, for search services, a search feature would be a
clear example of a functionality.
Clause 136: Meaning of “online safety functions” and “online safety matters”

This clause sets out the meaning of “online safety functions” and “online
safety matters”.
Subsection (1) sets out that “online safety functions’’ refers to OFCOM’s
functions under this Bill and under sections 3, 7, 11, 14(6)(a) and 14(6B) of the
Communications Act 2003. “Online safety functions’’ also covers OFCOM's power to
do anything incidental or conducive to carrying out these functions.
Subsection (2) provides that “online safety matters’’ means the matters to
which OFCOM’s online safety functions relate.
Clause 137: Interpretation

Subsection (1) sets out the meanings of various terms used in the Online
Safety Bill.
Subsection (2) explains what is meant by references in the Bill to “taking
down” content.
Subsection (3)(a) provides that references in the Bill to use of a service or
access to content, also refers to services or content which require payment of a fee,
subscription or registration to use or access them.
Subsection (3)(b) provides that references in the Bill to the making available,
accessing, encountering or sharing of content, includes scenarios where content is
only made available, accessed, encountered or shared for a limited period of time.
Clause 138: Index of defined expressions

This clause lists those provisions which define or explain terms used in this
legislation.
Final provisions

Clause 139: Extent

This clause provides that the Bill extends to England and Wales, Scotland
and Northern Ireland.
These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)
Clause 140: Commencement

This clause explains when the provisions of the Bill will come into force.
Subsection (1) provides for the commencement at Royal Assent of framework
provisions (including the definitions and interpretation clauses) and certain regulation
making powers which are needed in advance of the rest of the Act coming into force.
Subsection (2) provides that the remaining provisions in the Bill will come into
force on such day as the Secretary of State may appoint in regulations. Subsection
(3) states that the remaining provisions can be brought into force on different days.
Subsection (4) provides that clauses 71 (the requirement to name a senior
manager) and 73 (senior management liability: information offences) cannot be
brought into force before the publication of the report on the outcome of the review
required in clause 115 (Secretary of State’s review).
Subsection (5) states that the Secretary of State can, through regulations,
make transitional or saving provisions in connection with the coming into force of any
of the provisions in this Bill.
Subsection (6) confirms that any power to make regulations, as set out
above, is to be exercised by statutory instrument.
Clause 141: Short title

This clause establishes the short title of the Bill as the Online Safety Act.

#### DELEGATED POWERS MEMORANDUM

PART 7: GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
Clause 140(2) and (5): Commencement

Power conferred on: Secretary of State
Power exercised by: Regulations
Parliamentary procedure: None

Context and purpose

This clause deals with the commencement of the provisions of the Bill. It provides that
a number of provisions, listed in subsection (1), will come into force when this Act is
passed. The remaining provisions will come into force on a day set out by the
Secretary of State through regulations. These can be different days for different
provisions.
Subsection (4) provides further specification for the commencement of two clauses. It
sets out that the clauses relating to the requirement to name a senior manager
(clause 71) and senior manager liability (clause 73) may not be commenced before
the publication of the report on the outcome of the review required by clause 115.
Subsection (5) further provides that the Secretary of State may by regulations make
transitional or saving provision in connection with the coming into force of any
provision of the Bill.
Senior Manager Liability and the Secretary of State’s Review

This legislation includes a deferred power for the Secretary of State to introduce
criminal offences for named senior managers of in scope service providers who fail to
comply with information requests from OFCOM. Prompt and accurate provision of
information from service providers will be crucial in order for OFCOM to assess the
efficacy of the regulatory framework, and how best to apply it to ensure the safety of
users. These deferred offences will help further deter providers from failing to comply
with OFCOM’s information requests (alongside OFCOM’s other enforcement powers).
Clause 71 sets out how senior managers are named and clause 73 sets out the
offences which they will be made liable for.
These clauses cannot be commenced until the Secretary of State’s review has been
undertaken and the report published. This will ensure that they can only be
commenced on the basis of sufficient evidence and that in scope service providers
have adequate clarity about when the offences may come into force.
Clause 115 provides that the Secretary of State must review the operation of (a) the
regulatory framework and (b) section 11 of the Communications Act 2003 (OFCOM’s
media literacy functions insofar as they relate to online safety matters). The review
must consider the effectiveness of the Online Safety regime, including among other
things OFCOM’s information gathering and enforcement powers and whether it would
be appropriate to commence clause 71. The review must be carried out within two -
five years of Part 2 of the Act coming into force, and cannot be carried out earlier or
later than that. Following the review, the Secretary of State must prepare and publish
a report on its outcome.
In carrying out the review, the Secretary of State will be required to consult with
OFCOM and any other persons they consider appropriate. Once that review is
complete, clauses 71 and 73 may be commenced.
Justification for the power

A power is needed to commence those provisions which do not come into force on
the day on which the Act is passed.
Having the power to make senior managers responsible for failures relating to these
requests will help drive a culture of engagement and collaboration with OFCOM in
respect of information requests and also with the broader framework.
An important area of responsibility will be making sure the regulator has access to
accurate and timely information. This will be crucial to allow the regulator to
understand how the duty of care is being met and where there is risk of harm online.
The government is, therefore, targeting the senior manager sanction at this key
element of the regime. This approach will also help to ensure senior managers are
clear about what is expected from them and help drive a compliance culture.
Recognising industry concerns about potential negative impacts on the attractiveness
of the United Kingdom tech sector, the power to commence the senior manager
liability offences will be deferred for at least two years after the regulatory framework
comes into effect. The decision to commence the offences will be subject to a review
of the impact of the framework, which includes an assessment of the suitability of
commencing the offences. The offences will be a last resort, only to be used if
providers have failed to meet their information sharing responsibilities. This approach
balances industry concerns with many stakeholders’ support for the proposal as a
way to drive culture change.
Justification for the procedure

Commencement regulations will be made by statutory instrument. No Parliamentary
procedure is considered necessary, given that the detail of the provisions to be
commenced would already have been considered by Parliament during the passage
of the Bill.
The power to commence clauses 71 and 73 is also exercisable by statutory
instrument, and the commencement of these particular offences will, on the face of
the Bill, be deferred for at least 2 years from the commencement of the Bill. As above,
no Parliamentary procedure is considered necessary given that the detail of the
provision will be considered during the passage of the Bill. The report on the outcome
of the Secretary of State’s review has to be laid before Parliament before clauses 71
and 73 can be commenced.
Accordingly, the Secretary of State will be able to consider the merits of bringing the
senior manager liability offences into force. The procedure is limited in scope to
commencing the offences. It is considered that no further Parliamentary procedure is
necessary, given that the details of the provisions to be commenced would already
have been considered by Parliament during the passage of the Bill.
