(The bulk of both documents have been placed in their respective sections - this contains material from both documents which did not fit there)

#### SUPPLEMENTARY EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM

###Financial implications of the Bill
The Bill includes powers to allow OFCOM to charge fees to industry in order
to become cost neutral to the exchequer. Operating costs incurred by OFCOM in
carrying out its functions as Online Harms regulator will be met by proportionate fees
charged to industry. Further details of the costs and benefits of provisions are set out
in the impact assessment published alongside the Bill.


###Compatibility with the European Convention on Human Rights
The government considers that the Bill is compatible with the European
Convention on Human Rights. Accordingly, a statement under section 19(1)(a) of the
Human Rights Act 1998 will be made to this effect.
In addition to tackling illegal and harmful content online this legislation will
protect freedom of expression and uphold media freedom. Specific provisions have
also been included in the Bill to ensure that user’s rights to freedom of expression
and privacy are considered and protected by providers of regulated services.

###Related documents
The following documents are relevant to the Bill:
● Online Harms White Paper and Consultation
● Online Hams White Paper Initial Government Response
● Online Harms White Paper Full Government Response
● Impact assessment
● Delegated powers memorandum

###Annex A – Glossary
Category 1 services User-to-user services which meet the Category
1 threshold conditions and are included in the
relevant OFCOM register. The providers of
these services are subject to additional duties in
relation to content that is harmful to adults,
content of democratic importance and
journalistic content; additional reporting and
redress duties; and additional duties with regard
to protecting users’ freedom of expression and
privacy rights. Providers of Category 1 services
are also under a duty to produce annual
transparency reports

Category 2A services Search services which meet the Category 2A
threshold conditions and are included in the
relevant OFCOM register. The providers of
these services are under a duty to produce
annual transparency reports

Category 2B services User-to-user services which meet the Category
2B threshold conditions and are included in the
relevant OFCOM register. The providers of
these services are under a duty to produce
annual transparency reports

Code of Practice A code of practice issued by OFCOM outlines
the recommended steps to be taken by
providers of services in complying with their
duties

Regulated Service A user-to-user service or search service which
is subject to duties under the Bill

Provider The entity which has control over who may use
a service

Service
This may refer to a user-to-user service (an
internet service which allows user-generated
content to be uploaded or shared by a user), a
search service (an internet service which
includes a search engine which allows multiple

These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)

websites to be searched), or an internet service
(a service made available by means of the
internet).


##### DELEGATED POWERS MEMORANDUM

ONLINE SAFETY BILL
Memorandum from the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport and the
Home Office to the Delegated Powers and Regulatory Reform Committee

A. INTRODUCTION

This memorandum has been prepared for the Delegated Powers and Regulatory
Reform Committee to assist with its scrutiny of the Online Safety Bill (“the Bill”). The
Bill was published in draft on 12 May.
This memorandum identifies the provisions of the Bill that confer powers to make
delegated legislation. It explains in each case why the power has been taken and
explains the nature of, and the reason for, the procedure selected.
B. PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF THE BILL

The internet has, in many ways, transformed our lives for the better and recent shifts
in behaviour mean that we use the internet now more than ever. Internet use in the
United Kingdom across all adult age groups increased from 80.9% in 2012 to 90.8%
in 2019.^1
However, as the role of the internet has changed, the case for robust regulatory
action has continued to grow. Over three quarters of United Kingdom adults express
a concern about going online, and fewer parents feel the benefits outweigh the risks
of their children being online (falling from 65% in 2015 to 55% in 2019)^2. Whilst
providers of services are regulated in various ways, there is nothing in place to
regulate how they treat user-generated content online.
This landmark legislation will end the era of self-regulation. This Bill will impose
statutory duties on providers of regulated services to help keep their users safe
online, and appoint OFCOM as the independent regulator to oversee the regulatory
framework. The Bill will apply to providers of internet services which allow users to
upload or share user-generated content or otherwise to interact online (‘user-to-user
services’) and on providers of services which allow users to search all or some parts
of the internet (‘search services’).
These obligations apply to providers of regulated services, including those based
outside the United Kingdom. To be in scope of regulation, the services must: have a
significant number of users in the United Kingdom; be targeted towards United
Kingdom users; or be capable of being used by individuals in the United Kingdom and
give rise to a risk of significant harm to individuals in the United Kingdom.
Certain types of services associated with a low risk of harm are exempted, including
internal business services (such as intranets) and some services provided by public
(^1) Internet users’ Office for National Statistics, May 2019) “Internet use” here refers to respondents who have
used the internet in the last three months”
(^2) Children and parents: Media use and attitudes report 2019' OFCOM, February 2020

bodies. Certain types of content are also exempt from regulation on regulated
services: emails; SMS/MMS messages; one-to one live aural communications; paid-
for advertisements; services where the functionalities available to users are limited to
posting comments and reviews on content produced by the provider of the service
(such as user reviews of products); and content from recognised news publishers.
Services where the only user-generated content is an exempt type of content are fully
exempt from regulation.
This Bill includes 7 Parts and 5 Schedules. It includes measures to:
○ Create a regulatory framework that will impose duties of care on providers of
regulated services to improve the safety of their users and others who may
be adversely affected by content online. In particular, this includes:
■ Duties on all providers of regulated services to address illegal content
online, and ensure protections for children are in place where
required.
■ Duties on providers of high-risk, high-reach regulated services
(Category 1 services) to tackle content that is legal but gives rise to a
risk of harm.
○ Designate OFCOM as the independent regulator to oversee the regime, and
give them the enforcement powers required to tackle non-compliance. This
includes a deferred power for the Secretary of State to introduce criminal
offences for named senior managers of in scope service providers who fail to
comply with information requests from OFCOM.
○ Ensure safeguards are in place to protect freedom of expression.
As new services, functions and harms emerge and evolve and platforms and users
develop new ways to interact online, the regime must be able to adapt to these
changes. The harms enabled and facilitated by technologies also continue to change
at pace and the framework will not be able to function effectively if it proves unable to
adapt to new forms of harm.
A number of the delegated powers included within this legislation will allow the
government to make regulations in areas where there is likely to be change, such as
giving the government the ability to set new priority harms. Others will allow the
regulator to produce codes of practice setting out how companies can comply with
their duties of care. While previous government consultations focused on the overall
shape of the regulatory framework, OFCOM will consult on the codes of practice,
which will allow it to consider more detailed aspects of how the regime will operate.
This is a complex and technical area in which OFCOM’s extensive experience as a
communications regulator makes it best placed to develop many of the practical
features and processes needed to regulate effectively and independently. The use of
delegated powers will ensure that Parliament has a continuing statutory role in
determining OFCOM’s priorities and aims.
The new regulatory framework will be a central part of the United Kingdom’s digital
landscape and will help ensure that the business environment is pro-competition, pro-
innovation, and underpinned by agile and proportionate regulation. A thriving digital
economy and society relies on getting the rules right. The powers outlined in this
document will guarantee that the regime will be able to continue to evolve to be able
to protect users from harm, whilst adapting to the changing digital landscape.
C. DELEGATED POWERS

The measures referred to in paragraph 8 include new regulation-making powers, a
power to issue directions, powers to issue a framework document and powers to
issue statutory guidance and codes of practice. In addition, the Bill includes standard
regulation-making powers to make consequential amendments, transitional or saving
provisions, and provisions relating to commencement. This document provides
analysis of powers relating to 34 clauses and one Schedule.
Ten of the delegated powers are able to amend primary legislation (so-called “Henry
VIII powers”). Each such power is limited to amending only specific provisions of the
Bill. For example, the delegated power under clause 3(8) allows the description of
services exempted from regulation, which are set out in Schedule 1, to be amended
as new technologies and patterns of user behaviour develop. Without these powers,
the regulatory framework could quickly become inflexible and ineffective. As the
regulatory landscape changes, these measures will allow clearly identified parts of the
regulatory framework to be updated in response to these new developments.
Where the Department has assessed that Henry VIII powers are necessary, it has
ensured that the power is set out clearly on the face of the Bill and chosen
procedures which retain parliamentary oversight of any exercising of that power. As
such, all regulations made under Henry VIII powers in the Bill must be laid before
Parliament before they come into effect. This will ensure that Parliament will be able
to scrutinise any decision to amend primary legislation.
In deciding whether matters should be specified on the face of the Bill or dealt with in
delegated legislation, the Department has carefully considered the need:
○ To avoid too much technical and administrative detail on the face of the Bill;
○ To provide flexibility for responding to changing circumstances, so that
requirements can be adjusted without the need for further primary legislation;
and
○ To allow detailed administrative arrangements to be set up and kept up to
date within basic structures and principles that are set out in primary
legislation, subject to Parliament’s right to challenge inappropriate use of
powers.
In deciding what procedure is appropriate for the exercise of the powers in the Bill,
the Department has carefully considered in particular:
○ Whether the provisions amend primary legislation; and
○ The importance of the matter to be addressed.
