###Financial implications of the Bill
The Bill includes powers to allow OFCOM to charge fees to industry in order
to become cost neutral to the exchequer. Operating costs incurred by OFCOM in
carrying out its functions as Online Harms regulator will be met by proportionate fees
charged to industry. Further details of the costs and benefits of provisions are set out
in the impact assessment published alongside the Bill.


###Compatibility with the European Convention on Human Rights
The government considers that the Bill is compatible with the European
Convention on Human Rights. Accordingly, a statement under section 19(1)(a) of the
Human Rights Act 1998 will be made to this effect.
In addition to tackling illegal and harmful content online this legislation will
protect freedom of expression and uphold media freedom. Specific provisions have
also been included in the Bill to ensure that user’s rights to freedom of expression
and privacy are considered and protected by providers of regulated services.

###Related documents
The following documents are relevant to the Bill:
● Online Harms White Paper and Consultation
● Online Hams White Paper Initial Government Response
● Online Harms White Paper Full Government Response
● Impact assessment
● Delegated powers memorandum

###Annex A – Glossary
Category 1 services User-to-user services which meet the Category
1 threshold conditions and are included in the
relevant OFCOM register. The providers of
these services are subject to additional duties in
relation to content that is harmful to adults,
content of democratic importance and
journalistic content; additional reporting and
redress duties; and additional duties with regard
to protecting users’ freedom of expression and
privacy rights. Providers of Category 1 services
are also under a duty to produce annual
transparency reports

Category 2A services Search services which meet the Category 2A
threshold conditions and are included in the
relevant OFCOM register. The providers of
these services are under a duty to produce
annual transparency reports

Category 2B services User-to-user services which meet the Category
2B threshold conditions and are included in the
relevant OFCOM register. The providers of
these services are under a duty to produce
annual transparency reports

Code of Practice A code of practice issued by OFCOM outlines
the recommended steps to be taken by
providers of services in complying with their
duties

Regulated Service A user-to-user service or search service which
is subject to duties under the Bill

Provider The entity which has control over who may use
a service

Service
This may refer to a user-to-user service (an
internet service which allows user-generated
content to be uploaded or shared by a user), a
search service (an internet service which
includes a search engine which allows multiple

These explanatory notes relate to the Online Safety Bill as published in draft on 12 May 2021 (Bill CP 405)

websites to be searched), or an internet service
(a service made available by means of the
internet).
